Radical Reporting
Most people dread writing reports; they also dread reading reports. What 
they don’t realize is that the techniques that make writing more readable 
make it more powerful. This is especially relevant for professionals in areas 
such as audit, risk, compliance, and information security.
This small volume provides the tools and techniques needed to improve 
reports. It does so through addressing crucial concepts all too often overlooked 
in the familiar rush to perform tasks, complete projects, and meet deadlines.
These concepts – the role of culture in communication; the link between 
logic and language; the importance of organizing thoughts before writing; 
and how to achieve clarity – may seem academic or theoretical. They’re not. 
Unless writers understand their own thoughts, actions, and objectives, they 
cannot hope to communicate them at all – let alone clearly.
This second edition develops these points with additional material on crit￾ical thinking, as well as the use of AI in reporting.
Sara I. James is an internationally recognized expert in internal audit com￾munications. Through her business, Getting Words to Work®, she delivers 
tailored report-writing and other training to internal audit, risk, compli￾ance, and information security teams worldwide (www.saraijames.com). 
With over 30 years’ academic, teaching, writing, publishing, and corporate 
experience in North America, Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East, 
she brings a wealth of varied yet specialized expertise to clients and audi￾ences. As a member of the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (UK 
and Ireland) Technical Guidance Working Group, Sara has produced many 
governance, risk, and internal audit advisory pieces. She has also produced 
articles on clear writing for industry journals and spoken at numerous audit 
conferences and heads of internal audit forums. In 2022, she was named 
one of Richard Chambers’ Internal Audit Beacon award-winners. Finally, 
Sara has been fortunate to live, study, and work in different countries, 
including the US, the UK, France, and the then-Soviet Union, and speaks 
five languages. These experiences and skills give her invaluable insight into 
cross-cultural communication and global organizations. She is also regu￾larly asked to contribute scholarly essays, articles, and conference papers on 
language and literature.Security, Audit and Leadership Series
Series Editor: Dan Swanson, Dan Swanson and Associates, Ltd., 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
The Security, Audit and Leadership Series publishes leading-edge books 
on critical subjects facing security and audit executives as well as business 
leaders. Key topics addressed include Leadership, Cybersecurity, Security 
Leadership, Privacy, Strategic Risk Management, Auditing IT, Audit 
Management and Leadership
Global Audit Leadership: A Practical Approach to Leading a Global 
Internal Audit (GIA) Function in a Constantly Changing Internal and 
External Landscape
Audley L. Bell
Construction Audit: Building a Solid Foundation
Denise Cicchella
Continuous Auditing with AI in the Public Sector
Lourens Erasmus and Sezer Bozkus Kahyaoglu
Ironwill 360° Leadership: Moving Forward: Unlock Twelve Emerging 
Trends for Forward Thinking Leaders
Douglas P. Pflug
The CISO Playbook
Andres Andreu
Leveraging Blockchain Technology: Governance, Risk, Compliance, 
Security, and Benevolent Use Cases
Shaun Aghili
The Closing of the Auditor’s Mind?: How to Reverse the Erosion of Trust, 
Virtue, and Wisdom in Internal Auditing
David J. O’Regan
Radical Reporting: Writing Better Audit, Risk, Compliance, and 
Information Security Reports (Second Edition)
Sara I. James
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/Internal-Audit-and￾IT-Audit/book-series/CRCINTAUDITARadical Reporting
Writing Better Audit, Risk, 
Compliance, and Information 
Security Reports
Second Edition
Sara I. JamesSecond edition published 2025 
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2025 Sara I. James 
First edition published by CRC Press 2022
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the 
author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or 
the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace 
the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to 
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any 
copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we 
may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, 
reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, 
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access 
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not 
available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to 
infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-72754-7 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-72753-0 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-42236-5 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003422365
Typeset in Sabon
by Newgen Publishing UKTo the late Les Greenblatt – cousin, teacher, mentor, friend.
And to Chessh – first and last and always.vii
Contents
Acknowledgments xi
Author xiii
Introduction xv
PART 1
Words in the mind 1
 1 Communication and culture 3
National or regional culture 5
Sector culture 11
Profession- and specialism-specific culture 14
Organizational culture 17
Notes 21
 2 Communication within and among teams 23
Within 24
Between or among 30
Upward and outward 33
Notes 37
 3 Clarity: The theory 39
Habit 40
Tiredness 43
Fear 44
Clarity and success 45
Lack of clarity – and failure 48viii Contents
Ego and overcompensation 52
The ethics of clear communication 55
Notes 59
PART 2
Words on the page 63
 4 Clarity: The practice 65
The ABCs 68
Active 68
Brief 73
Concrete 78
Other hindrances to clear writing 82
Personal hang-ups 82
Corporatespeak (yes, again) 83
Mechanical mistakes: Basic accuracy 85
Mechanical mistakes: Grammar (including punctuation) 87
Mechanical mistakes: Usage 90
Help is at hand 91
Help yourself, help your readers 93
Notes 96
 5 Planning 100
The James Ratio 101
Mind-mapping 103
Outlines 110
Mini-outlines 115
Notes 123
 6 Structure and layout 124
Structure 124
Layout 132
Templates 135
Notes 154Contents ix
PART 3
Words into action 157
 7 Findings or observations and recommendations 159
Who is not doing what? 161
So what? 165
How did this happen? 169
Notes 180
 8 Executive summaries 182
Audience and purpose 182
Meeting your audience’s needs: What to include 
in an executive summary 185
Meeting your audience’s needs: What to exclude 
from an executive summary 189
Executive summaries and emotions 194
Notes 198
 9 Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 200
Reviewing, editing, and proofreading 201
Reviewing in the workplace 202
Reviewing your own work 203
Reviewing another’s work – and having your 
own work reviewed 206
Proposed submission and review process for reports 212
Writing checklist 213
Reviewing checklist 213
Notes 216
Conclusion 218
Resources 223
Index 229xi
Acknowledgments
This section alone risks seeing me break one of my own rules – not to write 
too much. But how else can I thank everyone who has helped me with this 
book, an exciting project and one I hope will change how people work.
From the beginning, this has been an international endeavor, though one 
that started close to home, when my partner, John Chesshire, put me in touch 
with CRC Press series editor Dan Swanson. Dan, together with Gabriella 
Williams and her colleagues at Taylor & Francis Group, made writing the 
book a far more enjoyable process than I ever would have imagined.
Thanks to those who reviewed my initial proposal – David Deegan, 
Liz Sandwith, and Meredythe Spence – for their time, encouragement, 
and insights. Along with the subject-matter experts, Martin Cutts and 
John Chesshire, they made comments and suggestions that vastly refined 
and improved my original thoughts. Thanks, too, to Dr. Sumner Braund, 
Professor Robert F. Cook, and Professor David Lee Rubin for their practical 
help and advice with the mechanics of editing, indexing, and graphics. The 
manuscript would have been a sorry-looking creature indeed without you.
The content and graphics wouldn’t have existed without contributions 
from colleagues and friends across the world. From Amsterdam to Yerevan, 
people with incredible experience, wisdom, and advice generously agreed 
to provide graphics, templates, and their own insights during interviews. 
Thanks to Pierre André, Rupert Bamberger, Ola Bello, Jane Bettany, Paul 
Breach, Jeffrey W. Brown, Rachel Browne, Mark Carawan, Ara Chalabyan, 
Richard Chambers, Vincent Chardot, David Dart, David Deegan, David 
Hill, Rinus de Hooge, Nino Karazanashvili, Philipp Kratzer, Alee Marschke, 
Margaret McCaig, Louise McKay, Fran Meegan, Marisa Melliou, Rupert 
Morris, Duyen Nguyen, Virpi Oinonen, Scott Petersen, Alex Psarras, 
Nannette Ripmeester, Alexander Rühle, Steven Sanders, Liz Sandwith, Dan 
Shoemaker, Emma Smith, Komitas Stepanyan, Alex Tytkovskyi, Shawn Von 
Hagen, Malcolm Zack, and all those who contributed anonymously.
My final words on this page are for those who gave me my first words: 
my parents, Tony and Alice Tortora. Thank you for passing onto me your 
lifelong love of language, reading, writing, and learning.xiii
Author
Sara I. James is an internationally recognized expert in internal audit com￾munications. Through her business, Getting Words to Work®, she delivers 
tailored report-writing and other training to internal audit, risk, compli￾ance, and information security teams worldwide (www.saraijames.com). 
With over 30 years’ academic, teaching, writing, publishing, and corporate 
experience in North America, Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East, she 
brings a wealth of varied yet specialized expertise to clients and audiences.
As a member of the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (UK and 
Ireland) Technical Guidance Working Group, Sara has produced many gov￾ernance, risk, and internal audit advisory pieces. She has also produced arti￾cles on clear writing for industry journals and spoken at numerous audit 
conferences and heads of internal audit forums. In 2022, she was named one 
of Richard Chambers’ Internal Audit Beacon award-winners.
Finally, Sara has been fortunate to live, study, and work in different 
countries, including the US, the UK, France, and the then-Soviet Union, 
and speaks five languages. These experiences and skills give her invaluable 
insight into cross-cultural communication and global organizations. She is 
also regularly asked to contribute scholarly essays, articles, and conference 
papers on language and literature.xv
Introduction
AND SO IT BEGINS
If you have bought this book, or even borrowed it, you must be in desperate 
straits. After all, reporting is painful – and anything radical doubly so.
You may see reporting, and individual reports, as a problem to solve. 
True enough, they tend to linger on most office workers’ to-do lists. Many 
people admit to loathing reports – both writing and reading them. Some 
may claim to love writing them, to find the process easy: “The words just 
flow,” they say. I suspect their readers don’t always love reading the result 
quite so much.
However, whether you love or loathe writing or reading reports, you 
probably see far too many bad ones. Bad reports do not exist in isolation, 
of course. They are often the product of individual assumptions and habits, 
team and organizational culture, and over-engineered processes.
Bad reports are a problem because they are usually painful to write and 
read. So the people and teams producing them suffer unnecessarily, as do 
readers. This brings us to an even bigger problem than that of individual 
suffering.
If we write bad reports, people won’t want to read them. Those who force 
themselves to do so may find they cannot understand them. Worse, they 
may believe they understand them – but they don’t.
All these problems have real-world consequences. If we don’t recognize 
and solve the problems, then our reports will be at best ineffective and at 
worst damaging. By this, we mean the very purpose of reports – to provide 
information that helps readers improve things – is thwarted. This in turn has 
serious repercussions for entire organizations, especially in times of crisis.
Will this book help you solve at least some of these problems? I hope so. It 
depends on your expectations, really. You should reconsider your purchase 
if any of the following apply:
• You want a list of rigid rules, dos, and don’ts so that you can sim￾ply copy and paste “prefabricated”1 words and phrases onto a blank 
screen.xvi Introduction
• Similar to the above, you think there is only one way to write a report, 
and this book will tell you what it is.
• You think your colleagues, team members, and even line managers 
are all idiots. You therefore hope to use this book as ammunition next 
time they have the gall to write something in a style other than yours.
• You have an important exam coming up next week and think this 
book will help you pass it. (Not a chance. Most exams simply require 
you to regurgitate definitions and phrases; this book wants you to 
think critically.)
• You don’t want to think critically. Ever.
If you’ve lasted this long, you may have an inkling that writing a good 
report is not a speedy or superficial matter. It requires serious reflection. It 
also requires accepting some ambiguity, as well as having a splash of toler￾ance for others. (This may be particularly difficult for my target audience: 
audit, risk, compliance, and IT professionals. But I say this from a place 
of love.)
Still with me? Good – you clearly recognize there is a problem and want 
to solve it. But to do this, we need to go to the very roots of writing and thus 
reporting. This is why the book is called Radical Reporting.
Let’s begin with some definitions.2
Report:
• An account given of a particular matter, especially in the form of an 
official document, after thorough investigation or consideration by an 
appointed person or body.
• A spoken or written description of an event or situation, especially one 
intended for publication or broadcasting in the media.
Radical:
• (Especially of change or action) relating to or affecting the fundamental 
nature of something; far-reaching or thorough.
• Forming an inherent or fundamental part of the nature of someone or 
something.
• (Of surgery or medical treatment) thorough and intended to be com￾pletely curative.
So how will this book help you improve your reports, making them truly 
radical? Read on.Introduction xvii
First, it will encourage and help you to think deeply and originally, I 
hope, about writing. Why do you write anything, let alone reports? What 
do you expect from the process and the product? Do you think about what 
others expect?
Writers must understand the purpose of any writing, including writing 
reports. Speaking of purpose, are reports even necessary? Surprisingly, not 
always. For example, the Global Internal Audit Standards of the Institute of 
Internal Auditors refers to communicating results, but doesn’t dictate using 
a report to do so.
However, since we must communicate results, most of us still find it better 
to record what we need to say in some permanent form. We could use cave 
painting or metaphysical poetry, but for now, reports seem to do the trick. 
So how do we make reports fulfill a real function, rather than becoming an 
activity performed for its own sake?
This is an uncomfortable question. If you are in a team dedicated to 
reporting, querying the very purpose of reports may seem obvious. “We are 
the regulatory risk reporting team – we know why we write reports!” But 
do you? I’ve seen regulatory risk reports that inform, warn, instruct, shift 
blame, ask questions, and much more, all in the same document. This is not 
necessarily a good thing – as a reader, I never once felt certain of the purpose 
of the report and therefore my role in reading it. Did the writers intend all 
that? Or did they, faced with a deadline and some internally sensitive con￾tent, start filling pages in a panic? I’m not being cynical – merely observant. 
Even if we are required to produce a report that does all I’ve described, it’s 
best to do so understanding why.
We must also understand the poor readers who have to work through 
reports, hunting for meaning, advice, and recommendations. After all, 
they’re not reading them for fun, but because they must. They do so usu￾ally in good faith, believing that their efforts will lead to something useful. 
Writers create a product; readers consume it. This is, as Steven Pressfield 
rightly says, “above all, a transaction. The reader donates his time and 
attention, which are supremely valuable commodities. In return, you the 
writer must give him something worthy of his gift to you.”3
Understanding readers means not only knowing their job titles. It also 
means recognizing how culture – from team and organizational culture, to 
regional and national culture – affects communications. Individual response 
also plays a part; you can find yourself addressing a team and receiving 
starkly different responses from individuals within it. Some may be open to 
what you say, others defensive or even combative. Cultures may play a part, 
but so will personalities and feelings.
Don’t run away at the mention of feelings! The emotional aspects of writ￾ing, reviewing, and reading play a major role in this book. For our writing 
to be effective, we must recognize and anticipate our and others’ reactions 
to writing.xviii Introduction
You, too, will have your own fears, preconceptions, and workload, all 
of which affect how you write. This is why the first, and possibly the most 
important chapter in this book, addresses the role of culture in all communi￾cation. It’s not something that applies only to global companies or multicul￾tural teams. We all have our own approaches, assumptions, and reactions, 
especially under stress or pressure.
Speaking of pressure, you may say, “I don’t have time for this. I know 
why I have to write this report and why people should read it. I just need 
to sit down and write the stupid thing, now!” And you may well punch 
out 10, 20, 30, even 50 pages by a deadline. But are you sure anyone will 
read it?
This first step of serious, critical reflection about why and for whom we 
write is essential. I agree it takes time that we often feel we do not have to 
spare. Yet without it, anything we write will not attract, retain, or persuade 
readers. And that would be a false economy. As Abraham Lincoln suppos￾edly said, “If I had five minutes to chop down a tree, I’d spend the first three 
sharpening my axe.”
This book’s focus is reports. However, to produce better reports, we have 
to go to the root (radical, remember?). This means laying the groundwork 
for critical thinking and a conscious appreciation of the complexity and 
nuance of language. When you find yourself writing on autopilot, the reader 
will definitely experience that boredom and fatigue described earlier. That’s 
not good for them, for you, or for what the report is trying to achieve.
The opposite of autopilot is conscious effort: critical thinking, certainly, 
but also the time, discipline, and focused self-doubt that implies. It’s essen￾tial for any successful communication.
Does that mean writing is hard? Well, it depends on what you mean. 
Spewing black marks onto a screen, or scribbling by hand without engaging 
your brain – unfortunately, that’s all too easy. The advent of word process￾ing hasn’t made people worse writers. It’s simply multiplied the amount of 
bad writing we read, just as it has multiplied the amount of (much rarer) 
good writing we read.4
Writing well, on the other hand, is hard, as the great William Zinsser 
said: “A clear sentence is no accident.”5 It requires thought, discipline, even 
selflessness. And who wants to put that much effort into anything?
If you want people to read what you write, you should want to, or 
at least recognize the need for effort. Writers as different as Byron and 
Hemingway have agreed: “Easy writing makes hard reading.” There must 
be effort on one side of the transaction between writer and reader – and 
if the writer doesn’t take the trouble, why should the reader? Most peo￾ple will say the problem is time. They will acknowledge that good, clear, 
useful writing takes time. (“I’m sorry to have sent you such a long letter; I 
didn’t have time to write a short one.”) This prompts the question: time for 
what? Writing? Correcting? Arguing with colleagues and managers about 
the text? None of these.Introduction xix
What this book will encourage you to do first is to sit still and think. You 
may say you don’t have time, but again, that’s a false economy. Failing to 
think clearly about what you have to say, and why, means you will never 
convey it well.
The real reason, though, is that it’s uncomfortable. No one wants to be 
alone with their thoughts. Yet if you don’t master this crucial step, how can 
you clarify and then articulate those thoughts, so that someone else can 
translate them into action?
If you think skipping the initial, unavoidable stage of reflection is OK, ask 
yourself why you’re reading this book. Are your reports good enough? Are 
they even readable? 
If they aren’t good enough or readable enough, perhaps it’s because you’re 
wasting time and energy on the wrong things. This may mean readers waste 
time and energy trying to understand what you’ve agonized to write.
The second way in which this book will help you improve your reports is 
by offering concrete tools and techniques. As we’ve said, virtually everyone 
nowadays would say they have too much to do and too little time in which 
to do it. That’s one reason I despise the common advice to draft a document 
and then put it away overnight, or even for a week, before re-reading it 
afresh. What planet do people who say that live on? Can I visit? If you are in 
a position to leave drafts unbothered for days at a time, then you probably 
don’t need this book.
For those of us living on this planet, however, this book offers practical, 
relevant advice and resources that should help you work more efficiently 
and effectively. These are aids to identify quickly and clearly the focus of 
your writing and to diagnose common problems. There are no magic tricks, 
or rigid lists of dos and don’ts (comforting though it may be to outsource 
our judgment), though. Instead, this book provides aids not only for your 
own reflections, insights, drafting, and reviewing, but also for sharing your 
newfound knowledge.
Of course, this book aims to help you improve all written communication 
in the workplace: annual, periodic, or engagement plans; terms of reference; 
memos; emails; project updates; business cases; and so on. In this respect, 
it is not unique.
There are many resources on reporting, and any sound book, course, 
or trainer will give you many of the same principles on writing clearly. 
This book offers numerous resources for you to broaden and deepen your 
knowledge of good writing, and good reporting. Other books in this series 
will complement this book by helping you expand your communication 
skills.
However, you still need something different – something that gives you 
even more. The “more” is insight specifically into some of the hardest reports 
to read and write: audit, risk, and compliance reports, including those from 
IT and cyber specialists. Their subject matter may appear dry and technical, 
but at every stage, human beings and their feelings are involved. To help xx Introduction
you produce better reports, no matter how technical, each chapter will fea￾ture advice from a range of practitioners in audit, risk, compliance, and IT 
security. Throughout the book, you will see insights and suggestions from 
people who set the standards in their organizations and professions.
Readers are human, too. When they complain reports are boring, it’s 
often because the subjects they convey are dry. Often, however, what passes 
for boredom is actually fatigue. It’s that creeping weariness, sometimes 
accompanied by a looming headache, that signals sustained yet pointless 
mental effort.
This is what happens when reports – or any documents – are badly writ￾ten. Most people write badly, which turns reports into one of the most 
reliable horrors of corporate life. As we said above, reports aren’t isolated 
documents – they’re the result of bad reporting processes, practices, and 
products, all of which I’ll discuss in later chapters.
All writers must acknowledge these and other uncomfortable truths. 
Above all, to communicate well in any medium, writers must expend time, 
effort, and discipline: three things many of us feel we lack. This is why it’s 
important to have relevant, practical tools and techniques we can use to 
improve our writing and communicate action.
As we said earlier, this book won’t be the only one trying to help you out 
of bad habits. It is, however, the only one that combines that element with 
an in-depth knowledge of some of the toughest areas to produce reports in. 
These areas – audit, risk, and compliance, especially with an IT or cyber 
slant – see people trying to document what has happened or what they’ve 
done. The dictionary definitions support this. However, it’s only half of the 
equation – and an ineffectual half, if you don’t consider the other.
The other half of the equation is why people document what they do. You 
may say it’s primarily to cover yourself, and few would disagree. One thing 
this book does not do is sugarcoat the reality of office politics, corporate 
standards, and team culture. All these things and more conspire to militate 
against good, clear communication.
However, many people want to produce something worthwhile, which 
will leave readers clear about what they should do and why, whether that’s 
improving operations or risk mitigation or project delivery. Both groups, 
which overlap, will find what they need here.
The third way this book will help you is by boosting your confidence. 
I’m convinced that many potentially good writers who nonetheless produce 
stilted, wordy, vague reports do so because somewhere along the way they 
have lost confidence. Maybe a teacher mocked them; maybe a colleague 
red-penned an early draft into oblivion. Maybe, through years of seeing and 
being encouraged to produce bad writing, they’ve become convinced that 
their original way – clear, simple, tell-it-like-it-is – was somehow foolish, 
unsophisticated, or unprofessional.
That’s all wrong. If you recognize yourself in what I’ve just described, then 
consider this book your de-programming. Some of the invitations to reflect Introduction xxi
may be uncomfortable. You may have to examine some of the assumptions, 
values, and habits you’ve acquired over the years. Are they useful? Were 
they ever? What will you have to do to change them, and how will you feel 
about that? (See, we’re back to feelings.)
However, I’m convinced that when this book asks you to pause and 
reflect, even five minutes will produce sound insights. You can then use 
these insights to identify your strengths and focus on which one or two 
weaknesses you need to address, to produce better reports more quickly 
and confidently.
I’ve already mentioned the practical advice and resources this book offers. 
There are also exercises. All of these aim to build your skills and confi￾dence. Now, given the pace of change in the 21st century, pandemic-inspired 
changes in working customs, and people’s limited time, we have to choose 
those tools that simplify and streamline.
It is therefore up to you how much you do, when, and how. Even if you 
only dip into the book initially, you should find suggestions that are imme￾diately relevant to your work. You can (and should) always revisit it later, 
perhaps doing some of the exercises or selecting resources for further read￾ing. You’re in charge!
Once you’ve built up your own confidence, and mastered the techniques 
that work for you, you can share what you’ve learned with your colleagues. 
Whether it’s having more probing conversations with reviewers, reviewing 
peers’ work more constructively, or coaching colleagues, your progress 
doesn’t end with the last page. You’ll know that this book has done its job 
when you realize that your writing skills are a work in progress – forever.
I strongly believe that only professional writers can advise on writing. 
This is because non-professionals – experienced subject-matter experts, for 
example – may be excellent at what they do, but that doesn’t mean they can 
also communicate it well. We can all put black marks on a page, but few of 
us are experts in language or writing. After all, simply having a body doesn’t 
make one a doctor.
Many people also tend to see their own experiences and preferences as 
a universal truth. When they try to translate this into coaching or training, 
they risk narrowing people’s understanding of what’s possible, and worse, 
passing on bad habits or myths. You will have seen this in the workplace. 
Communication and report-writing in particular are subject to a lot of 
debate, not least because people have strong views.
What complicates matters further is the debates about the language used: 
vocabulary, grammar, punctuation, usage, tone. Often this is because inef￾fective and inefficient use of language obscures the content. However, it’s 
also because writing and reviewing are deeply personal actions. Language 
is a medium to express perception, understanding, judgment, emotion, and 
choice. It goes to the heart of our beliefs and even our sense of self. Consider 
that dry IT report. If you criticize the language, you criticize the writer’s 
personal style. If you criticize grammar and punctuation, you criticize their xxii Introduction
education, background, and upbringing. If you criticize how they have 
structured and worded the report, you may be criticizing the way they see 
the world.
Writing and reviewing reports is a minefield. That’s why this book will 
give you a manageable range of tools and techniques for every stage of writ￾ing your report (or any other document). They are practical, time-tested, 
and apply even when you’re on version 37, it’s past midnight, and the draft 
was due last week. What’s more, if you follow the advice in this book, you 
should never find yourself in that situation again.
In the following chapters, you will discover insights, approaches, and 
resources to help you re-build your reporting skills from the inside out. 
There will be case studies, exercises, recommended further reading, and 
end-of-chapter summaries and activities to help you improve day by day. 
However, you will get more out of them once we have laid the foundations 
of our work, by examining in detail the purpose of communication, and the 
underlying assumptions we bring to it. The first few chapters, focusing on 
these topics, are thorough if not lengthy. However, just as a sturdy house 
needs solid foundations, so too does effective communication.
Going back to our principle of radical reporting, the root of good report￾ing is understanding communication – what, why, who, when, and where? 
The first topic we will cover will address how every act of communication 
takes place within a cultural context: national, sector- or profession-specific, 
and organizational, in a section entitled “Words in the mind.” Building on 
this, we will then look at the mishaps and pitfalls inherent in intra-organiza￾tional communication. Many people will have experienced the pain of try￾ing to persuade senior managers that their risk management is flawed. How 
many have experienced even more pain discussing the same topic within 
their own teams?
The book then moves on to what you may have expected (and can easily 
find in other books): writing clearly. This section is called “Words on the 
page.” Making the case for clear thinking leading to clear writing, we’ll then 
show how to achieve it. Grammar, punctuation, and usage play a part, but 
this book will demystify long-held beliefs and probable sources of stress. 
Using good grammar, punctuation, and usage is both more important and 
less painful than most people realize!
Planning has a chapter all to itself. You may think you have established 
planning processes in your team or department; I’m sure most of you do. But 
how do you plan what you’re going to write? Few people take a step back 
from the mass of information they could communicate to reflect on what 
they should communicate. This chapter will share tools and techniques to 
take control of your material before you take up a pen or touch a keyboard. 
Not only will it help you decide exactly the “big picture” questions of what 
to communicate to whom and for what purpose – it will make drafting the 
actual report much easier.Introduction xxiii
When it comes to writing, templates will not save you. We will look at the 
pros and cons of standard templates. How can you arrange a document to 
invite readers and increase accessibility? What software is available to help 
teams organize their working papers and produce reports? Should we be 
relying on software as much as we do – or more?
Finally…reports. This section is “Words into action.” You may have 
expected the book to start with its ostensible subject. However, everything 
that precedes the act of writing is essential to its success. What is the pur￾pose of reports? If they don’t fulfill one, should we get rid of them? What do 
different professions and specialist areas – audit, risk, compliance, and IT 
– require or expect? Do international standards, where they exist, increase 
or diminish the pain of reporting? Some of the content may surprise you.
And truly finally…reviewing. It’s a significant part of the pain of report￾ing, because it involves human beings, and their messy, complicated assump￾tions, impulses, and emotions. This takes us full circle: to culture, and the 
inherent difficulties in communicating with our own species.
The solution is not to leave everything to the available software. It is to 
show how putting this book’s suggested approaches into place makes draft￾ing and reviewing reports easier. Using principles and techniques from the 
world of publishing, you will see how to review your and others’ work in a 
constructive, effective and efficient way.
If you want to change the way you write reports – for yourself and for 
your readers – then this book will help you. It will, in doing so, change how 
you think, how you communicate, and how you work.
And then what? Well, it will be a lifetime’s work. No true writer is ever 
“finished,” perfect or unable to learn more. The more you practice writing, 
and good writing, the more competent and confident you will become. This 
will not only improve your own morale, but that of your colleagues, as you 
share your expertise with them and thus improve everyone’s performance.
You have nothing to lose except a few hours and many illusions. Enjoy!
NOTES
1 Thank you, George Orwell. “Politics and the English Language,” Why I Write
(London: Penguin Books, 2004), 105.
2 Oxford Dictionaries, https://premium.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/
report and https://premium.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/radical
3 Steven Pressfield, Nobody Wants to Read Your Sh*t (New York: Black Irish 
Entertainment, LLC, 2016), 5.
4 The ratios are probably the same since the dawn of writing – a completely unsci￾entific survey (my 30 years in academia, publishing, and industry) leads me to 
think that in any field, fewer than 10% of writers will be truly competent.
5 William Zinsser, On Writing Well: The Classic Guide to Writing Nonfiction
(HarperResource Quill, 2001), 12.Part 1
Words in the mindDOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-2 3
Chapter 1
Communication and culture
Culture is more than important: it’s essential to writing better reports. So, 
in addition to understanding the purpose of reports, we have to understand 
ourselves and our readers. What are our own beliefs and assumptions about 
reports, or indeed any workplace communication? Do we project these onto 
our readers? What are the results?
It’s commonplace now to acknowledge culture as a factor, if not the major 
factor, in human interaction and indeed corporate life. The auditing of cor￾porate culture has been topical and indeed fashionable in recent years, with 
teams looking at this complex subject in specific functions or departments. 
However, culture should be at the heart of most, if not all, investigations, 
audits, and reviews.
But what do we mean by culture in a corporate setting? People speak of 
an organizational or even team culture: “How we do things around here.” 
And that’s powerful – it will affect what people do, how they do it, and why. 
It’s even more powerful for often being unspoken.
If we accept that every act of communication – and therefore every report 
– must unite feelings, thoughts, words, and actions, then we have to under￾stand the culture or cultures in which that report is being written and read.
This takes us back to the purpose of reports. In theory, people write 
reports so that others can act on them, or gain new knowledge and insights. 
As we established in the Introduction,
Report:
• An account given of a particular matter, especially in the form of an official 
document, after thorough investigation or consideration by an appointed 
person or body.
• A spoken or written description of an event or situation, especially one 
intended for publication or broadcasting in the media.4 Radical Reporting
However, to do so, we must worm our way into people’s minds. They will 
be receptive to new information and exhortations to act only if they are 
willing to read what we write in the first place. They must want to read, 
attentively and through to the end.
Facts are not enough to prompt these reactions in people. As history – 
especially recent history – shows us, people can have all the facts relevant to 
a decision at their fingertips. They may choose to ignore them, pretend they 
don’t know they exist, or even dismiss them as “fake news.” What persuades 
people to acknowledge facts, to familiarize themselves with them, and, we 
hope, to accept them, is how we engage their feelings. How can we make 
them feel so that they want to read the report or other fact-based docu￾ments? How can we boost those feelings so that, even if the report contains 
unpalatable truths, they continue reading, and finally accept the facts as a 
basis for discussion and action?
If indeed we write reports so that people can act on them, we must realize 
that facts are not the only factor. Please note – I am not spouting the once￾fashionable phrase “Feelings are facts.” After all, if I am diagnosed with a 
severe illness but feel perfectly well, that doesn’t mean I am not still ill. 
Feelings coexist with facts – they should not trump them, but often do when 
we don’t acknowledge their existence.
Let’s apply this to a commonplace topic that arises in many countries: 
that of how immigrant labor may affect a local population’s chances of 
finding work. Imagine one group stating that immigrant labor doesn’t 
affect the local population’s chances, and using economic data alone to 
bolster its case. This group uses unvarnished facts, believing they are 
sufficient.
Imagine then an opposing group, claiming the discussion is not about 
economic data, but rather about their perceptions of the local economy. This 
opposing group may protest strongly that its members feel overlooked, mar￾ginalized – left behind. This group waves aside the economic data and says, 
“But this is how we feel!”
Chances are that the two groups will never hear each other, let alone come 
to any form of compromise. This is because neither is recognizing the other’s 
position. In many cases, it may be that the empiricists – the fact-lovers – 
need to acknowledge the romantics’ – the feeling-lovers’ – position first. 
After all, it’s hard to persuade people who feel no one listens to them if you 
don’t listen to them.
This is incredibly difficult for empiricists to do – as one, I have often 
struggled with what seems to be someone’s willful or egotistical insistence 
on feelings. “Your feelings are neither here nor there,” I want to say. “Look 
at the video recording, or the phone-call transcript, or the automated test 
results!” I have never done this, of course, but have seen how even politely 
skimming over someone’s feelings – “Yes, yes, very well, I think we’ve all Communication and culture 5
heard your thoughts on that” – can shut down the conversation. “Well,” the 
other person thinks, “if you don’t want to listen to me, why should I listen 
to you?”
Again, it may feel frustrating for those of us who value facts and logic to 
feel we have to bow to the vague, touchy-feely world of the romantics. Yet 
without elevating emotion over logic, we must recognize that how people 
feel about our work affects how they read our reports.
The examples I have given are those of two sides in an economic and 
socio-political debate, and of two individuals in a work-based discussion. 
We can all, however, extrapolate to examples in organizations, where a 
department or team appears to fall into one or the other extreme 
category.
You may find – to create a completely stereotyped example – an IT team 
that lives and breathes binary code, and whose greatest passion is for the 
latest coding superstar in the field. To create another stereotype, you may 
work with a communications team that, while valuing performance statis￾tics, focuses on how they and others feel about what they do. And both 
teams would be right to prioritize what they prioritize. In each case, this is 
their strength and purpose.
Understanding that is the first step to communicating effectively with them. 
If you understand their values, priorities, and assumptions, you understand 
their culture. You will therefore better understand what they do and why they 
do it – crucial when conducting any sort of review or investigation – and how 
to discuss it with them.
Given that you will have many discussions before writing any formal 
report, it is essential to get them right. If you approach verbal exchanges – 
whether in person, on the phone, or by videoconference – without consider￾ing culture, you may well end up speaking at cross-purposes. You may not 
ask the right questions, understand what’s implicit in certain answers, or 
even get people to engage with you. The risks are clear.
Every act of communication – and therefore every report – occurs in one 
or more specific cultural spaces. Chapter 2 will explore team culture in 
greater detail, as well as profession- and specialism-specific culture. However, 
it’s worth starting big, with the type of culture most people are born into, 
raised in, and often don’t question.
NATIONAL OR REGIONAL CULTURE
This seems the most obvious one. Yet I’ve seen (and worked in) many 
organizations that pride themselves on being global, yet understand noth￾ing outside their front door. (They often don’t understand much within 
the organization, either, but we’ll get to that point later.)You’ll probably 6 Radical Reporting
have seen business etiquette guides that acknowledge different cultural 
norms, which is helpful when attending meetings in foreign countries. So 
you’ll have read of the importance of bowing in Japan, or how innocuous 
hand gestures in the US or UK could cause offense elsewhere.1 It’s great 
that those exist – at least you won’t get run out of town five minutes into 
negotiations!
However, I’m writing this book a year into a pandemic that has brought 
business travel to an almost-complete halt. Whether national or interna￾tional, meetings, conferences, and training that would have taken place in 
person now take place online. While this saves us jet lag, and helps the envi￾ronment, it doesn’t mean we can dispense with cultural considerations sim￾ply because we’re not physically in the same room.
It never did.
Geert Hofstede’s work on the role of national or regional cultures 
across corporations was new. It made many in business realize that, while 
they might not speak an overseas colleague’s language, they could at 
least try to understand the colleague’s likely values and assumptions. 
Hofstede’s six dimensions model examines how different countries 
ranked in criteria such as individualism, power distance, masculinity, 
uncertainty avoidance, long-term orientation, and indulgence. The Geert 
Hofstede website2 offers not only resources and tools for researchers, but 
also blogs and maps that anyone in an international organization can 
benefit from. His work has been valuable for people operating in differ￾ent cultures, with his consultancy producing interactive tools allowing 
people to compare home and host culture. In this way, for example, a 
German person working in Dubai can see how the two countries com￾pare in Hofstede’s six cultural dimensions. This in turn should help the 
German national communicate more effectively and build good working 
relationships.
Given how acutely cultural differences inform communication styles, 
assumptions, and content, we must recognize them when interviewing, as 
well as when writing the resulting reports. One obvious difference is that 
between high-context and low-context communication. In low-context 
communication cultures, the listener or reader can take most words at face 
value. The context does not make a difference.
However, in a high-context communication culture, the listener or reader 
must look beyond the words for meaning. In a conversation, this means 
studying speakers for body language, facial expression, and tone to discern 
the “true” meaning of what they are saying. In reports, it means “reading 
between the lines” High-context cultures often present more opportunities 
for misunderstanding.
The following table illustrates perfectly what happens when a high-￾context culture (British) meets low-context culture (Dutch):Communication and culture 7
Source: Nannette Ripmeester, Expertise in Labour Mobility
Created over ten years ago, this table (sadly, not always credited to its 
author) found immense popularity on the internet. People adapted it to their 
own experiences and professional contexts, with the most recent version 
I’ve seen offering “Anglo-EU” translation.
While the table is humorous, and not to be taken literally, it does speak to 
a deep truth. As a whole, British people – and yes, that term does denote a 
diverse group, including English, Scottish, Welsh, and Northern Irish – prefer 
a high-context communication style. It is common to find them making 
potentially unclear statements they expect other people to query, parse, or 
perhaps just intuitively get.
Given how many people must write reports in English, no matter what 
their native language, it’s worth examining some assumptions. The anthro￾pologist Kate Fox, in her book Watching the English, points to the cultural 
pitfalls inherent in many Britons’, and particularly English people’s, pre￾ferred communication style:
It takes foreign colleagues and clients a while to realize that when the 
English say “Oh really? How interesting!” they might well mean “I 
don’t believe a word of it, you lying toad”. Or they might not. They 
might mean “I’m bored and not really listening but trying to be polite”. 
Or they might be genuinely surprised and truly interested. You’ll never 8 Radical Reporting
know. There is no way of telling: even the English themselves, who have 
a pretty good “sixth sense” for detecting irony, cannot always be sure.3
In contrast, a Dutch person (typically speaking perfect English) will leave 
you in no doubt that his or her “That’s interesting” means the listener is 
indeed interested. That is because the Netherlands, for example, has a 
low-context communication culture. If a Dutch person tells you that he or 
she doesn’t like your idea, your research results, or your criticism of his or 
her report…you’ll know!
The Dutch are not the only people associated with a more forthright com￾munication style. The journalist Emma Beddington wrote an amusing article 
entitled “What working from home has taught me about my partner and, 
worse, myself.” In it, she observes her (French) husband’s approach: “I note 
with alarm his tendency to speak his mind bluntly in professional settings 
instead of nourishing bitter, never-expressed grievances and sending overly 
polite emails, as is the British way. We must never be colleagues.”4
Rinus de Hooge is a respected leader in internal audit, risk, change manage￾ment, and counter-fraud. He has been working for different international 
banks, insurers, and asset managers for 30 years, with at one time 50 countries 
in his portfolio. A native of the Netherlands, he is skilled at communicating 
with international colleagues – often in English – and has first-hand experi￾ence of how mismatches in culture can impede communication. He is well 
attuned to the impressions people make on each other, and how their actions 
and assumptions can make or break relationships. His hobby – learning lan￾guages (German, English, Russian, Hebrew, and Arabic in addition to his 
native Dutch) – gives him further insight into cross-cultural communications.
Many native English-speakers do not adapt to non-native speakers’ needs 
and assumptions – what’s worse, they often won’t even think of them, or of 
the gap that can result. As de Hooge says, this
can create not only misunderstandings, but also create distance and 
make people become disconnected. My best connections, in English, are 
with non-native English speakers, e.g. my Eastern European colleagues. 
We are on the same level and there is no language “domination.”
But he goes further to identify a common problem that will harm relation￾ships even among people within the same culture. “The biggest barrier,” 
according to de Hooge, “is that people are not prepared when dealing with 
each other – not knowing each other, not understanding each other’s needs 
and not being interested in the human being.”
According to the BBC, most native English-speakers – unless they have 
mastered one or more foreign languages – are the worst communicators in 
business.5 The assumption that “everyone speaks English” and that every￾one shares the same cultural references can leave overseas colleagues baffled 
and irritated. What’s more, people who have never learned another language Communication and culture 9
haven’t had the experience of adapting their worldview, let alone speaking 
more clearly in a meeting.
It is of course impossible to overcome cultural differences, even if it were 
desirable. They often make for richer and more informed discussions. All we 
can do is be aware of our own assumptions and values, and that others’ will 
differ. Emma Smith, Global Security Director at Vodafone, urges her team to 
do so by considering “the many different languages and cultures we com￾municate to. Slow down, use fewer colloquialisms and idioms, offer more 
time for questions.” Even native English-speakers would appreciate this.
Since this book is in English, its focus is reporting in English. However, it 
includes advice and resources for non-native speakers writing in English, as 
well as for native English-speakers reviewing colleagues’ work. It’s common 
for native English-speakers to ascribe anything they disagree with in a non￾native-English-speaking colleague’s work to poor language skills.
Often, though, people who have learned a language to a high degree of 
proficiency are more correct in fact and expression than native speakers. This 
still doesn’t stop some managers from relying on stereotypes and assump￾tions. As de Hooge points out, such complacency and disconnection go 
beyond potential misunderstandings in conversation. If we don’t try to under￾stand the culture in which our colleagues and clients operate, it’s not only 
words and gestures we’ll get wrong – it’s entire documents and relationships.
It’s important to understand others’ expectations of what a report is and 
looks like, or even if it’s necessary. Other countries may expect what may 
seem academic elements – references to scholarly studies, or footnotes, for 
example. They will differ in the degree of formality used in workplace com￾munications. This means that using first names automatically, which is com￾mon in English-speaking countries, may not go down well elsewhere.
Another culture’s formality may then be reflected in the register and tone of 
written communications such as reports – we may need to discuss how to 
produce a piece of professional writing that is suitably distant or formal, with￾out being stilted or pompous. This is a hard balance to achieve. Finally, certain 
countries have a greater tolerance for lengthy texts, even while understanding 
that most readers would rather read a short one. If you are working with, for 
instance, a French colleague, don’t be surprised if he or she sees lengthy reports 
as the norm. Such documents may be a sign of thoroughness and intellectual 
heft in that person’s national and organizational culture. Again, simply being 
aware of the difference in expectations means you can anticipate and discuss 
any differences before they become misunderstandings or even barriers.
How we structure reports also reflects cultural expectations. We will 
cover this in greater detail in Chapter 6. Reports are usually most useful and 
reader-friendly if you think of them as newspaper articles; the headline 
should be clear, with the first paragraph giving the reader everything he or 
she needs to know. However, certain cultures – and organizations – prefer to 
start with positive messages, no matter what. We’ll discuss in later chapters 
how this can mislead readers and potentially damage organizations.10 Radical Reporting
Finally, people will differ in what they see as a logical order to the report; 
this may be down to national culture or simply a specific field. One cultural 
difference I have seen is in UK reports that may appear disorganized or 
repetitive to people from other cultures, especially North American and 
European ones. Having taught in universities, I was struck by the fact that 
UK (and Irish) students generally do not learn how to create outlines to plan 
their writing content. This is changing slowly but still seems limited to few 
people, often in post-graduate studies or on a specific studies-skills course. 
In most other western nations, children generally learn this skill in middle or 
early high school – between the ages of 12 and 14. This means they should 
have an advantage in quickly and confidently structuring whatever they 
write. It also explains what a German banker said to me when I explained 
this to him: “Ah! So this is why all the emails and reports from my English 
colleagues look like thought and word salads!”
It was a delightful image, but the message is serious. Anyone who doesn’t 
rigorously plan their writing will confuse or at least irritate the reader. And 
cultural differences in education and professional training can exacerbate or 
mitigate the problem. Erin Meyer’s The Culture Map: Decoding How People 
Think, Lead, and Get Things Done across Cultures is an invaluable resource 
for understanding cross-cultural communication in organizations. 
Particularly useful is her explanation of principles-first versus applications￾first reasoning, which clarifies why people from different cultures fore￾ground certain information, to the bewilderment of others.6
Even among native English-speakers, regional and national differences 
can affect how directly people speak. You could compare English and 
Scottish, Canadian and American, New Zealander and Australian; some 
would be more allusive in their communications, others more direct. As a 
native English-speaker, raised in the US but now living in the UK, I see cer￾tain public notices or email subjects as passive-aggressive or affectedly gen￾teel: “Friendly reminder,” “Please do not hesitate to contact me,” or “Polite 
notice,” where “Reminder,” “Please contact me,” or nothing at all would do 
the job. Having said that, even within the US, there are high-context/low￾context regional styles – the classic example is the Deep South (extremely 
polite, to the point of being cryptic) versus New York City (direct to the 
point of brusqueness). It’s “Well, I don’t know that person, but I’m sure s/
he’s perfectly nice,” versus “I hate that person.”
I have also seen this play out in different ways in my own international 
career. Working as an academic and in publishing, I saw how Britons 
working in the US would mistake American directness as a license to be 
rude. Not having had, as Kate Fox would point out, the deep cultural 
grounding in being direct but polite, they would unwittingly offend col￾leagues, then wonder why. I have seen the same thing happen in banking 
– specifically, in internal audit, whose work needs to come across clearly in 
order to serve the organization. We’ll see some concrete examples of this 
in Chapter 3.Communication and culture 11
SECTOR CULTURE
By sector, I mean private, public, or third sector. There are significant dif￾ferences in how these sectors operate, and we should recognize them. They 
will certainly have different objectives and priorities, such as adherence to a 
government standard, making a profit in a new market, or providing help to 
people in need. However, it’s not always as simple as drawing a line between 
the public and the private sectors – size, function, and organizational culture 
all play a role.
There is a common perception, especially among people who prefer less 
or smaller government, that the private sector is always more realistic and 
efficient than the public sector. I’m sure many of you have seen examples 
and counter-examples enough to know that this is simply not true – any￾thing so sweeping rarely is.
However, perceptions are important, and professionals moving from one 
sector to the other bring with them preconceptions and stereotypes. They 
may feel that moving from consultancy to the public sector means they are 
bringing advanced thinking and bold innovation. The reality will depend on 
the size and culture of consultancy they worked for, and the public-sector 
organization they’re joining. If the latter is relatively small, not obsessed 
with hierarchical formalities, and doesn’t over-engineer its processes, the 
new employee may be pleasantly surprised by smoother or more efficient 
ways of working.
Nino Karazanashvili has held various public- and private-sector roles. 
Currently Head of the Internal Audit Department in MFO Crystal, a 
Georgian microfinance organization, she previously worked at the Georgian 
Ministry of Defense. Her roles there included Head of Standardization and 
Quality Control, and Head of Internal Audit. When I asked her what was the 
greatest difference in corporate culture, her answer was immediate: “In one 
sentence – independence in making decisions, which increases the responsi￾bility.” Comparing her public- and private-sector experiences, she says,
In the previous context, in some cases (e.g. increasing human resources) 
there was no communication platform, while in the private sector I have 
this opportunity, but you need to be persuasive enough with your argu￾ments in order to get desired results. In both cases you need to gain 
support, but in different ways.
Even within the private sector, professions and businesses are so varied, it 
is almost impossible to generalize. A global bank will have one culture; a 
car parts manufacturer another. The private sector can also include small 
start-ups run from kitchen tables, companies selling anything from cup￾cakes to coaching, cleaning services to consultancy. To speak of the private 
sector as monolithic overlooks the fact that these examples have vastly 
different strategic objectives, risks, and attitudes to risk. If we forget that, 12 Radical Reporting
then we cannot provide useful insights and recommendations to our clients 
and colleagues.
The public sector too has a perceived image – sclerotic and bloated in 
some countries, trustworthy and citizen-focused in others. Yet it must 
depend on which kind of public-sector organization we’re talking about: the 
National Health Service in the UK, the largest single employer in the coun￾try? Or a team of six people providing the weather service in a small nation? 
They will have little or nothing in common, except being taxpayer-funded.
John Chesshire is an experienced internal audit, risk management, and 
governance expert. He was Chief Assurance Officer for the States of 
Guernsey for over ten years, and has worked closely with government 
departments in the UK and overseas for decades. His view on the communi￾cation culture in government is that it varies hugely – there is no one-size￾fits-all approach, simply because it is the public sector. “I think it’s more 
about the size of the organization than the sector,” he says.
In my opinion, large, central government departments have more par￾allels with large, private-sector organizations than with small govern￾ment agencies, or arm’s-length bodies. Communications tend to be 
more formal, more hierarchical, bureaucratic and more rigid. Smaller 
organizations, irrespective of sector, tend to be slightly more innovative 
and more willing – and certainly more able – to adapt and evolve their 
communication styles, media and messaging.
So, if public-sector communication style depends more on size and func￾tion, and less on the sector, what are some constants? One may be the role 
played by elections. A challenge faced by national and local government 
departments is the possibility that, every few years, the people at the top will 
change. And with them, the strategic objectives and priorities. This means 
that people working in the public sector may need to completely change 
direction, possibly abandoning projects they have worked on for years. In 
turn, this means that audit, risk, or compliance reports will have to reflect 
the change in strategy, objectives, and priorities – all while making their 
work available to the public.
Many public-sector bodies and organizations have been urged to imitate 
the private sector over the past few decades. Even the financial crisis of 2008 
seems to have done little to dent the myth of superior management and 
operations in the private sector. Universities in the UK, which traditionally 
rely primarily on public funding, have had a crash course in private-sector 
attitudes since the turn of the century. After the rising number of higher￾education institutions and the introduction of tuition fees, UK universities 
exist in an environment unimaginable a generation ago. The world of busi￾ness has entered the world of academia, with mixed results. The notion of a 
competitive market sees universities vying for student applications. The 
insistence on quantification and especially key performance indicators Communication and culture 13
(KPIs) has led, many would say, to a focus on what can be counted, rather 
than what counts. All of this has required increasing managerial, rather than 
academic, positions so that the real growth in universities is bureaucracy 
rather than research and teaching.7
Unsurprisingly, this affects communications. Having worked with both 
academics and people in industry, I was used to the different cultures and 
styles. However, when working with university administrators, what I saw 
was the result of fundamental misunderstandings about written communi￾cation. As André Spicer has pointed out, “What is striking is not just that 
universities have taken so keenly to the language of business, but that they 
have been so routinely bad at it.”8
Many people refer to “academic writing” and “business writing.” They 
often imply that the former is obscure and pretentious; they don’t realize 
how often the latter is, too. Many university administrators, neither academ￾ics nor people with any experience of business, often feel compelled to prove 
their ability to master both “academic” and “business” writing. I will let you 
imagine the result. The point is that no one should obsess about aping “aca￾demic” or “business” writing. The focus should be to produce good writing.
Finally, the third sector – often the charity sector – is caught between 
public and private in many ways. It relies often on government grants and 
private donations, but also increases revenue through sales. Pet charities sell 
calendars; stately homes sell tickets to visitors, and earn money through 
cafés and gift shops. In this sense, they are akin to many universities, in that 
they must somehow combine public- and private-sector objectives and prac￾tices. However, the underlying ethos may complicate such a pragmatic 
approach.
Jane Bettany is Head of Internal Audit for Frontline AIDS, an interna￾tional charity. According to her, the sector attracts “highly engaged staff 
who really care about the organization and the cause. The pay is lower so 
they tend to be less money-driven and more cause-driven.” This focus on the 
cause rather than material rewards means that people feel personally 
engaged in their daily work. As a consequence, what may be routine tasks in 
other sectors or organizations speak here to people’s hearts and identities. 
We’ll talk in Chapter 2 about how this can affect communication within and 
among teams, when “personal” and “professional” combine.
Since Frontline AIDS is an international team, Bettany is mindful of 
broader cultural differences, as well as sectoral. She considers not only the 
fact that colleagues are often personally committed to the cause, but also the 
fact that they have different communication styles.
I am aware of different needs, to be formal or more polite sometimes, 
or more friendly, depending on the country. We work a lot with Africa 
where people are so very warm, calling each other friends or colleagues, 
and I forget to add the warmth to my emails! Even legal letters some￾times have much more emotive and descriptive language in them.14 Radical Reporting
Mark Carawan is Senior Fellow at New York University School of Law, 
Program for Corporate Compliance and Enforcement. His previous roles 
include Chief Internal Auditor at Barclays and Citi, and Chief Compliance 
Officer at Citi. He echoes Bettany’s sentiment, and underlines how impor￾tant it is for organizations to develop a communication strategy that works 
for everyone. “The communication style must be respectful, sensitive and 
adaptive to get the message across. A communication style which does not 
adapt is ineffective, probably offensive, and at odds with an ethical culture, 
whatever the jurisdiction.”
And so we return to national culture. Culture never walks alone – we are 
the sum of our influences, from national through sector-specific, to profes￾sional and organizational.
PROFESSION- AND SPECIALISM-SPECIFIC CULTURE
Depending on your education, professional credentials, and further devel￾opment, you will already bring many habits, standards, and assumptions 
into your role. We often think of traditional professions such as law and 
medicine, and their accompanying jargon: legal “terms of art,” for example, 
or the Latinisms of medical terminology. However, in audit, risk, compli￾ance, and IT security, a range of specialist training and conditioning can 
feature in our reports.
In audit, for example, different backgrounds and qualifications dominate 
in different countries. External auditors are still usually chartered accoun￾tants, and, given external audit’s focus on accounts, that makes sense. 
Government auditors often have similar qualifications, too, and this links 
directly to value for money: taxpayers want to know what their national 
and local governments are spending taxes on. In fact, until recently, it was 
common for internal auditors in many countries to come to the profession 
from an accountancy background. This is clearly useful when assessing 
financial controls, especially in countries with stringent financial regula￾tions. It’s obvious why any organization will want to include accountancy 
specialists in the team.
However, accountancy is only part of the picture. Qualifications specific 
to internal audit equip internal auditors with the knowledge and skills to 
assess a range of internal controls – not only financial ones. The emphasis 
on risk-based internal auditing, which focuses on those things that could 
prevent an organization from achieving its strategic objectives, clearly goes 
beyond traditional “bean-counting.” A strong internal audit team is one that 
understands the broader organization and the range of relevant risks and 
controls. This means a diverse internal audit team will see more, understand 
more, and communicate more effectively.
So is there a single internal audit-specific culture? Traditionally, internal 
auditors were seen as interested only in numbers and “box-ticking” – jokes Communication and culture 15
about internal auditors coming around with their clipboards were the norm. 
There was some truth to this, especially in internal audit teams that con￾ducted cyclical audits. They would audit payroll every year, procurement 
every 18 months, and recruitment every two years – or something like that. 
If a new payroll system drastically reduced the risk of manual errors, it 
didn’t matter: the team would continue to audit payroll every year, no mat￾ter what. Meanwhile, over in procurement, a new senior manager dispensed 
with the existing process for assessing bids, in favor of a “streamlined” 
approach that allowed him to approach, assess, and approve suppliers with 
no checks or balances. Would it still be wise to wait before auditing that 
area?
Risk-based internal auditing brings the emphasis squarely back to risk. 
What is it, where is it, how do we assess it, and how can we mitigate it? This 
requires not only understanding risk, but also strong communication skills. 
Internal auditors need to work closely with other assurance providers both 
inside and outside the organization. Internal teams include risk, compliance, 
regulatory reporting, and subject-matter experts such as cybersecurity ana￾lysts or project managers. Outside the organization sit external auditors, 
consultants, professional bodies, and regulators. How these different spe￾cialists communicate with each other can make the organization stronger – 
or more vulnerable.
Having looked at organizations inside and out, Mark Carawan sees inter￾nal and external auditors as having more in common than many may think.
I do not think there are any inherent cultural differences between 
external auditors, internal auditors and compliance officers: each role 
demands adherence to principles requiring performance of fact-based 
assessments, transparency, integrity, and independence. Their roles 
are different, but there is a professional culture which binds them 
together.
This point takes us back to that made earlier: we need to understand the 
culture in which we work, interrogate our own assumptions, definitions, 
and priorities to make them explicit. Do all those who share a professional 
culture speak the same language? They may, but we will find out only by 
asking. Then we can say, for example, “When I talk about risk, this is what 
I mean.” And even more importantly, “What do you mean when you talk 
about risk? How do you see it?”
If we are speaking with a close colleague, we are likely in agreement, and 
can exchange reports using that term confident that we share the same 
understanding. However, what happens when we send that report to some￾one in senior management? First, let’s go back to basics: who are we sending 
it to? What is that person’s background? How could he or she interpret 
what we have written? If the person comes from project management, the 
word “risk” may conjure up a far broader meaning: anything that could 16 Radical Reporting
delay the project. If we send it to someone in cybersecurity, that person may 
think we have overlooked many worrying possibilities labeled “risks” in 
their team.
Internal audit vocabulary comes to seem intuitive to practitioners. To any￾one outside, or to novices, it can seem oddly clinical and even grudging. 
Consider the terms “adequate” and “effective.” To internal auditors, the 
terms are clear. An “adequate” control is one that is designed in such a way 
that, properly performed, it will mitigate a risk to acceptable levels. A classic 
example – one often used when training internal auditors – is that of cross￾ing a road. Adequate controls would include visible crosswalks, functioning 
traffic lights, accepted rules of the road, and pedestrians’ understanding they 
must look both ways. (Bear with me – this example is useful and will come 
up in later chapters.)
By “effective,” internal auditors mean that people follow the process or 
adhere to the control. In our road-crossing analogy, the controls are effective 
only if people use crosswalks, cross on the light, follow the rules of the road, 
and look both ways. If they don’t do any of these, then the controls are 
adequate but not effective.
These are important concepts in internal audit communications. If we say 
in a report that a control is adequate but ineffective, it means that it’s a good 
control – but no one is following its directions. If we say a control is inade￾quate – well, there’s no point seeing if anyone adheres to it, because even if 
they did, it wouldn’t mitigate risk.
However, can we rely on readers to understand what we mean by the terms 
“adequate” and “effective”? Given how important the concepts are, we must 
take care to explain our terms to a wider audience. Suppose a report states that 
a control is “adequate” without defining the term. Senior managers reading 
the report may take umbrage, believing the term damns their work with faint 
praise: “Merely ‘adequate’? That’s not very encouraging – we worked hard to 
develop a sound process.” After all, imagine that your manager told you your 
work was “adequate” – what would you think? This isn’t about being wordier, 
or adding glossaries to reports. It’s about being conscious of gaps between our 
own understanding and other people’s, and working to bridge them.
It is crucial to define and articulate any concept we see as fundamental. 
This is not easy – it requires alertness to ideas and tasks that have become 
second nature in our profession or specialist area. However, the very fact that 
it’s second nature – that we use or do something without thinking twice – 
means it may be unclear to others. “It goes without saying” or “It’s self￾explanatory” are risky in any field – all the more so when discussing topics 
that could help or harm an entire organization.
Most people want to see their organizations not just survive, but thrive. 
For those of us tasked with keeping organizations safe – through monitor￾ing, assessing, and reporting on risks and controls – clear communication, 
first with ourselves, then with others, is crucial.Communication and culture 17
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
This chapter has so far covered an array of cultures, all of which affect com￾munication. National and regional differences are what most often come to 
mind when people speak of cultural differences, and it’s clearly important 
to try to bridge gaps.
Further differences arise within sectors. People working for government 
will have different priorities from those working in a global bank, or a char￾ity. However, the lines between sectors are not impossible to cross. Similarities 
in size and function can create common attributes, so that, for example, a 
two-person risk team in a local council will be able to share similar experi￾ences with a three-person compliance team in a small credit union. The two 
teams may be in different sectors, with different specialist backgrounds and 
qualifications, but they can still find common ground.
Organizational culture is what dictates many people’s daily lives. Whether 
large or small, organizations tend to have “personalities” and attributes, 
which are nothing to do with public image. The organizational culture is 
what people mean when they talk about “tone at the top.” Culture usually 
flows downward, from board level, and it is the executive that decides the 
organization’s values, beliefs, and priorities. As with national culture, orga￾nizational culture likely affects every aspect of people’s experience in that 
entity.
In organizations, a good or bad culture dictates what people do at every 
level; this includes communication. Chapter 3 will give specific examples of 
how communication both promotes and reveals the true nature of a com￾pany’s culture, through real-life case studies.
How and what an organization communicates displays its culture. What 
does it believe is important? Is it willing to say so publicly? What constitutes 
success in the organization, and what does senior management allow or 
encourage to achieve it? Is failure an option? Since failure is inevitable in 
any human endeavor, how does the organization talk about it? The answers 
to all these questions will tell you much about the culture.
Often, national and organizational cultures reinforce each other to hide 
problems. It’s always worth asking why. If a problem has arisen, but 
nobody is willing to say so, does the problem still exist? Of course it does. 
This isn’t a philosophical conundrum about trees falling unheard in the 
forest, or a single hand clapping. This is about whether professionals com￾municate as adults, or as children, covering their eyes in the belief no one 
can see them.
Let me share one example from my experience as a report-writing trainer 
and consultant. A financial services organization’s risk function asked me to 
review reports and deliver training to improve them.
One report in particular puzzled me. I read from the beginning and found 
the executive summary reassuring. The team had reviewed a high-risk area 18 Radical Reporting
and seemed to have covered all the relevant controls. The report spoke of 
how hard senior managers in this area had worked, building relationships 
across the business, and improving processes by streamlining them.
Several pages on, the individual findings began. There were quite a few, 
couched in cautious, diplomatic language. By the third finding, I began to feel 
uneasy. There were hints – nothing explicit – that senior managers had per￾haps streamlined processes by circumventing controls. This was not what I 
had expected from the executive summary, which had in no way suggested 
that the improvements included diluting or removing basic checks and 
balances.
Reading further, I saw more and more findings that not only suggested 
deliberately weakened controls, but also potential fraud. The same senior 
managers who had streamlined controls seemed to personally benefit 
from the changes, whether through bonuses or even lucrative conflicts of 
interest.
This was a classic case of “reading between the lines.” There was nothing 
explicit or overt, simply page after page of heavy hints. I asked the team 
what was behind this. Was I cynical after years in internal audit? Or was 
there indeed misconduct? The exchange that followed was extremely reveal￾ing, and went something like this:
ME: Um, it reads as though the senior managers are gaming the system here.
TEAM MEMBER 1: Um, yes. That’s what we thought.
ME: OK… So, why so coy about it in this report? Or did you already cover 
this in reports to the board and risk committee? And I’m assuming you 
notified the police.
[silence]
ME: Anyone? What happened?
TEAM MEMBER 2: Well…it’s tricky.
ME: Meaning?
TEAM MEMBER 1: Well…it’s delicate. It’s a difficult conversation to have, accus￾ing people of fraud.
ME: OK, I understand. Are you saying that you didn’t have any hard evidence?
TEAM MEMBER 3: Oh, no – we had loads! A stack of paper about a foot high. 
All corroborated.
ME: Given all this evidence, you must have notified the board, risk committee 
and police, right? You surely didn’t leave it until this report, which is 
just a routine review, did you? I mean, this report doesn’t even refer 
directly to what you’ve just said happened.
[silence]
TEAM MEMBER 2: As we said, it’s tricky. I mean, you don’t want to have awk￾ward conversations and damage relationships in the business, do you?Communication and culture 19
ME: Sorry, I don’t understand. Which relationships would be damaged by 
reporting this crime?
TEAM MEMBER 1: Well, the senior managers in the area, of course.
ME: In other words…the fraudsters?
[silence]
The head of the risk function was at this discussion, looking troubled. I 
spoke to him afterward, and what he described was a perfect storm of cul￾tural conflict. He had spent seven years in the US before returning to lead 
this team in his home country, and had brought back with him more direct 
ways of expressing himself.
He observed, he said, a clear cultural difference between his US experi￾ence and his current one – one he never would have questioned before work￾ing abroad. However, his team’s unwillingness to state the truth openly was 
not simply down to cultural differences in communication style; it was a 
direct result of the organizational culture.
In organizations that “shoot the messenger,” problems are swept under 
the carpet. People working in them quickly learn to either conform or leave. 
(This head of risk eventually left.) The board and senior managers may feel 
that whatever they are doing is worth the risk. They may eventually have to 
pay a regulatory fine or settle a lawsuit if caught, but may feel that any pen￾alties are outweighed by profits. The broader ethical question doesn’t seem 
to come into the equation.
Other organizations may unwittingly create the perfect conditions for 
cutting corners and even committing fraud, even if those at the top don’t 
intend it. Companies that pride themselves on speed at all costs, innovation 
no matter what, and short-term results can put pressure on staff to do what￾ever it takes to meet targets.
In any organization, the language people use, and how they communicate, 
reveal the culture. Do they use euphemisms and copy in their entire hierar￾chy to any email? Does every report take a month to finish because of the 
layers of review and senior managers’ need to rewrite everything? Do inter￾nal communications encourage buzzwords and trendy phrases at the expense 
of clarity and precision? Is everyone under pressure to produce by some￾times arbitrary deadlines, with little time for reflection or debate? Is there 
any opportunity to persuade or influence those higher up?
If any of this sounds familiar, it reveals the organizational culture you 
work in. You may even think that since the company is doing well, it doesn’t 
matter. The profits are steady, so this way of doing things must be sustain￾able. Well, possibly – but only for so long, as we will see in Chapter 4. There 
is a difference between doing good and doing well; the words organizations 
use reveal what matters most to them.20 Radical Reporting
ACTIVITIES
• Consider your current role and organization. How many cultural influ￾ences can you associate with them? For example, if you are a Canadian 
IT security manager working in an Irish bank, you may have the following 
elements:
• Canadian upbringing and education (English, French, or bilingual?)
• Education and other experiences outside Canada
• Professional training, standards, and expectations as an IT professional
• Irish cultural expectations (again, dependent on location within 
Ireland)
• Bank’s corporate culture
• Bank’s security risk appetite or tolerance
• Team-specific culture (Is the focus on coding skills to outwit com￾puter viruses? Is it on customer communications? Is it on supporting 
the group risk function in its reporting?)
• Anything else?
• Now consider which of these elements is a strength or weakness in your 
communications? Do any of them contradict each other? For instance:
• You may have been raised to be direct in a French-Canadian environ￾ment; could your Irish colleagues find you too blunt? Or could they 
learn from your clear communications?
• Your IT training is likely to have focused on quantifiable results. Is this 
useful for reporting to senior decision-makers, or does it dilute the 
“big-picture” messages?
• If you have worked in other countries or organizations, does this help 
you see the bank’s corporate culture more clearly? What works well 
in it? What could be better?
You can approach these activities however you wish – you can simply reflect 
for a few moments, or document your thoughts. However much or little you 
do, the simple fact of thinking about culture and how it affects communication 
will help you draft your reports with greater awareness of your readers and 
yourself.Communication and culture 21
SUMMARY
• Different values and approaches – from national to individual – inform 
both verbal and written communication. Culture isn’t only about lan￾guage and gestures. It’s about how people perceive the world and their 
place in it. It affects how they communicate, and how they receive others’ 
communications.
• People working in public-, private-, and third-sector organizations may all 
have different approaches. However, the size and function of an organiza￾tion can blur the sector lines: small government agencies may feel alien￾ated from large government departments, while having much in common 
with a small- or medium-sized enterprise with a comparable number of 
employees.
• Professions have their own standards, qualifications, and language. This 
in turn informs not only how they communicate, but also the prism 
through which they see their professional world. It is not surprising if an 
auditor and project manager have different definitions of the word “risk,” 
or if accountants and cybersecurity analysts quantify things differently.
• Organizations may not be people, but they may still have “personalities.” 
When people talk about “tone at the top,” they talk about the values and 
beliefs – the culture – within the organization.
NOTES
1 For anyone who has heard the myth that communication is mostly non-verbal, 
here’s a useful corrective: David Lapakko, “Communication is 93% Nonverbal: 
An Urban Legend Proliferates,” Communication and Theater Association of 
Minnesota Journal 34 (2007): 7–19.
2 https://geerthofstede.com/culture-geert-hofstede-gert-jan-hofstede/6d-mod￾el-of-national-culture/
3 Kate Fox, Watching the English: The Hidden Rules of English Behaviour
(London: Hodder & Stoughton, 2004), 181–82. See also David Shariatmadari, 
Don’t Believe a Word: From Myths to Misunderstandings – How Language 
Really Works (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2019), 209.
4 The Guardian, November 30, 2020, www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/
nov/30/what-working-from-home-has-taught-me-about-my-partner-and-worse￾myself
5 Lennox Morrison, “Native English speakers are the world’s worst 
communicators,” BBC Worklife, October 31, 2016, www.bbc.com/worklife/
article/20161028-native-english-speakers-are-the-worlds-worst-communica￾tors. Furthermore, in an article in the Financial Times, Gillian Tett suggests that 
British workers could increase productivity by communicating more directly. 
“It’s time for us all to speak more like the Dutch,” February 29, 2022, www.
ft.com/content/29d360f8-fa26-4ade-adb8-298cb2ee191322 Radical Reporting
6 Erin Meyer, The Culture Map: Decoding How People Think, Lead, and Get 
Things Done across Cultures (New York: Public Affairs, 2015). 89–104.
7 “Today, two thirds of universities employ more administrators than they 
do researchers.” Hettie O’Brien, “From bogus self-employment to zero￾hours contracts – why working life has become unfulfilling,” The Guardian, 
June 19, 2021, www.theguardian.com/books/2021/jun/19/lost-in-work-by￾amelia-horgan-review-why-so-many-people-feel-unfulfilled. See also “The 
Guardian view on funding universities: the market model isn’t working,” The 
Guardian, May 30, 2021, www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/may/30/
the-guardian-view-on-funding-universities-the-market-model-isnt-working
8 André Spicer, Business Bullshit (London: Routledge, 2018), 95.DOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-3 23
Chapter 2
Communication within and 
among teams
Understanding, not understanding, or simply ignoring someone’s national, 
regional, professional, or organizational culture can be the difference 
between success and failure.
This doesn’t mean, though, that once people work in the same organiza￾tion, they share the same assumptions, values, and objectives. They’ll prob￾ably have many in common: an understanding of what the organization 
does, and a desire to see it succeed, for example. But once people sift into 
different divisions and teams, differences become apparent.
These differences can be down to different locations – a global organiza￾tion will have locations in various countries, which brings us back to cul￾ture. Even an organization limited to one country will see different 
approaches and styles in different locations; staff working in New York City 
will not have the same culture as those in Minneapolis, and Londoners may 
find they have little in common with Glaswegian colleagues.
The distinctions can be profession-specific, too; group legal and group 
HR are usually different creatures. However, even within those two groups, 
communication doesn’t always flow.24 Radical Reporting
Source: Virpi Oinonen (businessillustrator.com).
WITHIN
Many colleagues will likely share the same educational or vocational qual￾ifications, professional standards, definitions, assumptions, and objectives. 
Despite this, different roles and personalities mean it can often be harder to 
get immediate colleagues to sign off on something than to get “outsiders” 
to agree to it.
What kinds of communications take place within teams, how, and why? If 
we examine these points first, it should then shed light on how miscommuni￾cation arises among like-minded people, even before other teams join the fun.
In an office, face-to-face communications are usually informal conversa￾tions. There will be regular team meetings, but most interactions will be 
across the desk, passing in the hallway, or in a shared kitchen area. They are 
relatively unstructured, create either good or bad personal relationships at 
work, and so inform how people will interpret their interlocutors’ written 
communications – including reports.Communication within and among teams 25
Email, the bane of most people’s lives, lends itself to virtually any com￾munication form or style. It can be a brief personal query about a colleague’s 
weekend, or a lengthy, structured, more formal document – almost a mini￾report, but one using the medium of email. Again, the ease with which most 
people can send emails means that they are less likely to think about what 
they are saying, why, or to whom.
Why does this matter? First, bombarding colleagues with pointless emails is 
irritating. It is the equivalent of perching on a busy colleague’s desk and chat￾tering away about something trivial. Most emails aren’t necessary, and copy￾ing multiple names into emails is a sign of defensiveness. The senders are either 
deeply insecure, or need to protect themselves in a rotten corporate culture.
Second, emails – like casual conversations – set the tone for our written 
work. This can be good, as when we ask a trusted colleague to look at a 
rough draft. This colleague, knowing the writer and the context, is likelier to 
read the draft with a sense of perspective. He or she will be less likely to 
criticize every minor error and will focus on what is most important to help￾ing the writer progress. When we know and trust our colleagues, we tend to 
be better at giving and receiving comments about our work.
However, this familiarity can also mean that we forget to include impor￾tant information, or that we become sloppy and burden colleagues with 
unnecessarily clumsy work. John Chesshire refers to clumsy writers who 
subject him to such drafts as “serial writers” – but not in the sense that 
they’re writing a hit television series. These are the people, he says, who keep 
coming back with ever-more verbiage to inflict on the poor reader – the 
victim. “They’re ratcheting up the torture and the body count. Often I feel 
as though I’ve been bludgeoned, because I cannot merely skim – I have to 
read every draft all the way through. Afterwards, I feel as though I have a 
brain injury.”
This isn’t a flippant comment; often, when reading reports, I too have 
experienced worrying symptoms of an impending migraine or worse. Visual 
disturbances, looming pain, especially on one side of my head, nausea – all 
of these have happened simply from reading and re-reading extremely badly 
written reports. Too many clients, especially senior managers tasked with 
reviewing draft reports, have told me the same thing. It’s not actually sur￾prising – between the eye strain of repeatedly staring at a page or screen, and 
the mental strain of trying to extract some meaning from the impenetrable, 
our bodies tell us it’s too much.
A senior governance professional recently asked me if I thought he had 
dyslexia. I’d seen no evidence of this in our work together, so asked him why 
this had occurred to him. His answer was that when he reads reports at 
work, the words blur and jumble on the page. Because of this, he assumed 
he had a problem. I asked him if he experienced this when reading anything 
else – such as a newspaper article, novel, or even instructions for a toaster. 
The answer was no. This demonstrated perfectly how bad writing can affect 
readers mentally and physically.26 Radical Reporting
These physical reactions occur when we are trying to be attentive and rig￾orous in our reading. However, time, energy levels, and shared assumptions 
often conspire to create another situation. It’s less physically painful but 
counter-productive. This is when we assume near-complete understanding 
from our closest colleagues. Imagine I see someone every day at our shared 
workspace, that we chat together at the coffee-maker, and that we give each 
other brief, informal updates throughout the day across the desk. We will 
naturally assume that each has all the necessary information and context.
We may have much of it, but we’re not inside each other’s heads. So that 
means it’s all too easy to knock out a draft that makes perfect sense to us, 
pass it to our “work wife” (or husband or partner – our other half in the 
office), and expect total understanding. You have probably experienced this 
yourself, and at least one of the two things is likely to ensue. Maybe the col￾league won’t understand why you leap from A to D, or which standards are 
underpinning your risk assessment. This will take further time to explain, 
which means your review process isn’t as efficient as it could be.
Familiarity with one’s work and colleagues means that seeing it out of 
context can come as a shock. When I ask people to rewrite work they’re 
often extremely close to, utter bafflement is common. When they actually 
recall what they meant to convey, their rewrite bears little resemblance to 
the original. This brings home how dangerous it is to remain inside our own 
heads, whether individual or collective.
The second scenario commonly occurs in tight-knit teams, where the col￾league you ask to review may truly be close to your inner thoughts. If this is 
the case, he or she will make the same assumptions and overlook the same 
gaps. Now we’ve traveled from extreme irritation, eyestrain, and headaches, 
through inefficiency because of further explanations, to groupthink. Some 
would say that groupthink is the riskiest of all situations within a team.
Margaret Heffernan’s book Wilful Blindness: Why We Ignore the 
Obvious explores all the ways in which human beings unwittingly and 
often deliberately avoid seeing what is in front of them. She examines sev￾eral cases in which companies failed because of groupthink, where only one 
approach, vocabulary, or version of the truth was acceptable. In many 
cases, individuals knew things were going badly, but didn’t speak out. They 
didn’t know how to without alienating their group, their corporate “fam￾ily.” They feared losing promotion or even their livelihoods. In many cases, 
though, they had simply fallen out of the habit of questioning or contradict￾ing colleagues – which, as Chapter 1 showed, is even harder in some cul￾tures than in others.
Heffernan addresses the common human experience of living and work￾ing among those we resemble. Yes, it is natural to seek out our fellows, and 
it can be comforting, but “One of the many downsides of living in commu￾nities where we are always surrounded by people like ourselves is that we 
experience very little conflict. That means we don’t develop the tools we 
need to manage it and we lack confidence in our ability to do so.”1Communication within and among teams 27
Given how many waking hours people now spend in the workplace, com￾pared to at home or with friends and neighbors, it’s not unreasonable to see 
our team at work as our community.
Any of these situations, however, can be resolved through goodwill, as 
well as heavy doses of time, patience, and energy. In the real world, though, 
few of us have such gifts. As a result, things can often go awry when the very 
familiarity we think will create the perfect conditions for effective commu￾nication backfires.
Many people have mentioned to me that their closest colleagues can be 
the greatest sources of friction. We may often think that our team and func￾tion will present a united front to “outsiders,” whether clients, senior man￾agers, or board members. We want to make sure we all share the same 
understanding, and agree on how to articulate it, before sending a report. 
However, this isn’t always the case.
There can indeed often be more discord and tension within the team pro￾ducing the report, than between that team and the report recipients. What 
contributes to this, and how can we address it so that we spend our time 
producing better work for the organization, rather than squabbling with 
our closest colleagues?
Let’s first recall the earlier points about culture. Even if everyone in a 
team shares the same nationality, regional differences may mean conflicts 
in communication. Furthermore, differences in background, education, 
professional orientation, and further specialization mean colleagues work￾ing in the same team can be far removed in their assumptions and 
priorities.
Within audit and risk teams, for instance, you are likely to find people 
who have qualifications in those specific fields. However, many come from 
completely different backgrounds: accountancy, finance, law, IT, procure￾ment, even former academics in the sciences and humanities. While this 
means that large teams with diverse members will be able to draw on a 
variety of knowledge and experience, it also means they must be conscious 
of the need to foster communication within the team. Otherwise, the risk is 
too high that different people’s unspoken assumptions will surface exactly 
at the wrong moments. Different understandings of crucial concepts such as 
organizational strategy, risk appetite, or materiality thresholds need to be 
articulated and reconciled before the moment when they could derail impor￾tant work: a crucial client meeting; the organization’s risk register; or a 
report to the audit and risk committee.
Rinus de Hooge gives a specific example of having to clarify a term every￾one in a meeting assumed they had understood.
I performed a strategy audit in a Dutch environment and started asking 
what people thought of strategy. It turned out that, after some digging 
into the replies, everyone had a different definition of the word strategy. 
For some it was about “getting things done,” for others it was “about a 28 Radical Reporting
goal,” and again others had “a road map” in their head. Others used the 
word “strategy” with activities and mingled them. Unclear, unspoken, 
different combinations of definitions, implicit in people’s heads, made 
connecting difficult. It had led to non-implementation of strategy, as no 
one was quite aware what it meant.
It’s clear from this example that even within the same national culture, 
within the same organization, people have different interpretations of what 
should be a clear, commonly defined term. The result in this case was that 
the organization hadn’t actually put its intended strategy in place, doubtless 
thinking that the term “strategy” spoke for itself.
Another example is one I saw repeatedly in the internal audit function of 
a global bank. Most of the people working there were well qualified, knowl￾edgeable, and experienced. However, they were also human. It was therefore 
common for them to assume that their own understanding was universal, 
which led to some risky situations. One I am thinking of in particular was 
when teams from low-context cultures – the US, Netherlands, Germany, and 
German-speakers in Switzerland – would submit reports to their functional 
heads in London. The London-based heads would then change the style of 
the reports to suit their own perceptions of what was “correct.” This led to 
two problems.
First, the UK teams would assume that their overseas counterparts, “not 
being English,” needed to have their reports rewritten. However, given that 
the overseas teams overwhelmingly had much better grammar, spelling, and 
punctuation than their UK colleagues, this step simply introduced basic 
errors into what had been well-written reports.
More serious still were stylistic changes – those palatable to a high-con￾text culture such as the UK’s. Where reports had been clear and direct, while 
still professional and respectful, they were now vague, wordy, and evasive 
about what, if any, problems existed. As a result, the reports lost their value 
to the readers. Not only were they harder to read, they also obscured neces￾sary information.
There were further consequences to these changes, borne out of cultural 
differences. One was that UK teams did not appreciate the extent to which 
other countries’ regulators would disapprove of reports that appeared eva￾sive. Some countries’ regulators were known to be much tougher than the 
UK’s. They were readier to issue heavy fines and start criminal proceedings, 
and in some jurisdictions remove auditors’ license to practice.
People in the London office had assumed that because they and their col￾leagues around the world worked in the same specialist area of audit, they 
worked to the same rules. This meant they weren’t aware of significant dif￾ferences in the team: cultural, certainly, but also regulatory and legal. This 
could, if allowed to continue, have landed some non-UK colleagues in hot 
water in their own jurisdictions, with severe professional, financial, and pos￾sibly legal consequences.Communication within and among teams 29
Within teams who share a common background and understanding, 
there is still potential for discord. This can arise from different perspectives 
and deeply held views. As Jane Bettany says of her observations of the char￾ity sector,
Everyone has an opinion that is sometimes part of the core of who 
they are, so dissenting decisions can be difficult to resolve. Decision￾making in some organisations can tend to be more collaborative or 
consensus-driven. This takes a lot more time and can in the end upset 
a lot more people because they were given a chance to voice their opin￾ion, but then don’t feel they were listened to if their view wasn’t taken 
forward.
What Bettany describes so eloquently is not limited to the charity sector. 
Many people in public- and private-sector organizations are deeply attached 
not only to their own views, but also to their particular specialist angle. 
Thus someone from a risk management background may feel unheard if a 
colleague advocating entry into a riskier, but more lucrative market, car￾ries the debate. This in itself may arise from misunderstanding the nature 
of debate and discussion. Disagreeing with someone is not necessarily per￾sonal, and understanding someone’s position doesn’t mean agreeing with 
it. National or regional cultural differences can make these nuances even 
harder to grasp.
Many believe that the size of the team or broader organization can play a 
role, and John Chesshire described this dynamic in Chapter 1. However, 
humans are complicated – sometimes people bring a communication culture 
with them, wherever they go. Ola Bello is Head of Internal Audit at a 
medium-sized, UK-based insurer with approximately 500 employees. She 
previously worked in the insurance internal audit division of a global bank 
with tens of thousands of staff, but didn’t change her approach when she 
changed organizations. “My communication style doesn’t seem different 
with both firms. I think it depends on individuals rather than a firm style. 
Things like familiarity with the contact or stakeholder.” For Ola, clearly, the 
individual in front of her is what determines the exchange – not the size of 
the company.
The 2020 pandemic saw people across the globe move from office-based 
work to remote working. Whether in large or small organizations, video￾conferencing became the norm for many meetings, training events, and even 
regular one-to-one updates. Most people believe that remote working will 
continue in some form, even if only part-time, as it has proved generally reli￾able and cost-effective. However, the effects on communication within teams 
have varied widely.
Many people are keen to return to offices, citing “screen fatigue.” (Some 
even admit to missing their colleagues!) Others have been pleasantly sur￾prised by how remote working has broken down barriers. Previously, it may 30 Radical Reporting
have been difficult to get even a 15-minute in-person appointment with a 
senior colleague. When people work at different locations, travel to confer￾ences, or are away on holiday, it can be difficult to coordinate diaries. With 
reductions in travel across the globe, many more people are at home and 
more available to accept a videoconferencing invitation. In turn, this has 
increased the amount of verbal communication at all levels.
A series of webinars run by the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors in 
2020–21 showed that many members had benefited from being able to 
speak directly (via telephone or videoconference) with audit committee 
members and other senior staff in a way that previously would have been 
difficult. This in turn affected their reporting, often for the better. Having 
developed better relationships with people across the organization, the inter￾nal auditors felt less need to “over-engineer” their written communications. 
Reports in many organizations became shorter and more to the point, 
thanks to regular verbal communication establishing common ground. 
Previous reports – often lengthy and full of irrelevant detail – had arisen in 
a context of little face-to-face (including virtual) interaction and thus a wide 
margin of error in communicating.
Many senior managers realize the potential for misunderstanding in their 
own teams. After all, they are the ones who must first review and decrypt 
draft reports, well before other teams or clients see the final version. I firmly 
believe that 90% of my clients have come to me out of desperation – a clas￾sic “burning platform” situation. They don’t want to spend budget on train￾ing or consultancy, but it seems less painful than continuing as they are. The 
former may just work; the latter is clearly not an option anymore.
However, an alarming number of them overlook more serious risks aris￾ing from their existing reporting process. They may see report-writing train￾ing as a way to make the team work more efficiently, and review less painful. 
Many will see it as an opportunity to communicate more clearly with col￾leagues and clients. Vanishingly few realize the financial, regulatory, legal, 
and reputational peril their existing reports already put them in, simply 
through poor communication.
How then do those intra-team communications affect inter-team 
communications?
BETWEEN OR AMONG
We’ve seen the scope for misunderstanding within teams that supposedly 
have a great deal in common: professional qualifications, objectives, work￾ing processes. However, when team members share a common understand￾ing of terms and reporting, it can lead to groupthink. Not only can this stop 
people from seeing a bigger picture, with different elements and risks. It also 
increases the chance they will communicate at cross-purposes with “outsid￾ers,” anyone who is not part of the team.Communication within and among teams 31
This cross-communication can take several forms. Most obviously, it can 
alienate or confuse people. However, as stated above, it can pose an even 
greater risk: if it is not clear what different teams mean by something (such 
as “strategy,” “risk,” “material”), readers outside the team may believe they 
understand perfectly. But they won’t.
One group in particular seems to be extremely aware of its specialist 
terminology and therefore the risk of misunderstanding. When working 
with IT specialists, whether auditors, cybersecurity analysts, or business 
continuity consultants, I’m struck by how they describe themselves. They 
know they use terminology specific to their field and that non-specialists 
can feel intimidated. They also know they have to take pains to be clear 
and simple in their explanations. However, I feel they often focus on the 
wrong things.
It’s ideal to be aware of the gap between one’s professional group culture 
and others. It’s another to feel you must constantly apologize for it, or agonize 
over terminology that may be precise and useful. All too often, IT specialists 
worry about wording that either has become commonplace or is self-explan￾atory. Local or wide area networks; parallel testing; log-in credentials; phish￾ing – most senior managers will immediately understand these terms. Instead 
of focusing on what isn’t a problem, why not focus on what is?
One problem IT specialists and indeed entire organizations face is project 
management-speak, acronyms, and business buzzwords. These are all fads 
as fleeting as they are annoying, and the enemy of clear communication. 
Chapters 3 and 4 will allow us ample space to explore just how damaging 
they can be, and how we can resist them.
Perhaps it would be more useful for IT specialists to think of how to com￾municate the standards and underlying principles they use. How many non￾IT specialists know about the NIST2 and its Five Pillars, or COBIT3? These 
are sound, common-sense, principles-based assets to any organization. One 
thing IT specialists can do to bridge gaps is to consider ways to educate non￾IT teams in how they see the world. What current and emerging risks con￾cern them? These will often be easy to explain in plain language. How well 
does the organization’s IT governance support its risk management? Which 
IT projects should the organization prioritize? How should it manage those 
projects and report on them?
This is, in an era of ever-increasing cyber-threats, crucial to any organiza￾tion. IT specialists are indispensable to keeping their organizations safe, but 
they cannot do so alone. As the European Cyber Security Organisation’s 
[ECSO’s] 2021 CISO [Chief Information Security Officer] Survey Analysis 
Report says, “It is commonly agreed on that in order to align cybersecurity 
with business priorities CISOs not only need to manage up to their Boards, 
but also manage across to the employees/rest of the company or organisa￾tion.” [bold in original]4
Few would disagree with this statement. After all, there is little point in 
hiring the best IT specialists and then ignoring their advice. Nor should the 32 Radical Reporting
IT specialists do their work in a vacuum; as with any part of the organiza￾tion, IT must align its objectives and priorities to the organization’s. 
Whatever an organization’s risk threshold, in most cases it makes sense to 
adhere to it. (Obviously, this excludes criminal activity or indeed anything 
that will actively damage the organization.)
This assumes that the board and senior management have agreed, articu￾lated, and clearly communicated both strategic objectives and risk appetite. 
Whether they have done so, and how they have done it, reveals a great deal 
about the organization’s culture. It can be difficult to educate colleagues and 
improve controls under the best conditions; people are busy with their “real” 
work. It’s even harder if the message everyone receives is inconsistent and 
weak. People may think that IT security – or indeed any risk management 
activity – is unimportant, or concerns only those working in IT security, risk, 
audit, or compliance.
The ECSO rightly points out that 
Company culture and evolution of mentalities remain extremely slow, 
and it is still a long road. CISOs are often met with resistance when 
trying to implement a cybersecure culture in their companies and push 
employees to have a more cyber-hygienic workplace environment.5
Anyone can see that company culture will either encourage or hinder IT secu￾rity efforts. One common obstacle to a good IT security culture is the lan￾guage used. However, the problem is not the technical terminology most IT 
specialists reproach themselves for using. Instead, it’s what organizations do 
more broadly – using long words and too many of them, overcomplicating the 
simple.
Looking at the quote above, the ECSO wants companies to have “a more 
cyber-hygienic workplace environment.” This is both wordy and vague. How 
far does one go in creating an entire “workplace environment” (as distinct 
from simply a “workplace”)? Who came up with “cyber-hygienic”? For many 
people, this wording may create an image of robots moving around a stain￾less-steel, minimalist space. No wonder they don’t see how it applies to them.
Yet it does, and it’s as simple as saying things like,
Don’t share your user name and password with colleagues – and defi￾nitely don’t stick them to your computer screen! Don’t give team mem￾bers access to databases they don’t need for their jobs. Make sure you 
cross-shred sensitive documents before the cleaners come in. Lock away 
your files when you’re not at your desk.
After all, most data breaches come from inside the company – not from sin￾ister external forces.6 Nor are all these breaches linked to deliberate malfea￾sance. Often it’s a simple oversight, someone failing to follow a procedure 
or not even knowing about it.Communication within and among teams 33
Many people assume that it takes IT specialists to understand IT security; 
however, often it’s the most basic controls that make the greatest difference 
to an organization’s security culture. After all, how many people claim they 
can’t be expected to understand physical access controls because they’re not 
locksmiths or CCTV installers?
All of this seems obvious enough. However, organizational culture often 
discourages or even blocks communication among teams. John Chesshire, 
quoted in Chapter 1, says that the single biggest barrier to effective com￾munications is
In many ways the culture of the organization. I have worked in one 
organization in particular where communications between functions 
were inexplicably poor, for no obvious reason. After much consider￾ation, I can only put it down to the culture of the place and some of 
its leading personalities. A sense that somehow, knowledge is power, 
knowledge sharing and comms are unnecessary, and constructive dia￾logue is a waste of one’s time. I have never subscribed to these view￾points, by the way!
Given how senior Chesshire’s position was in the organization in question, 
this leads us back to “tone at the top.” If “leading personalities” permit or 
even encourage a counterproductive culture, it can be hard for even senior 
colleagues to change things. Boards and senior managers are responsible 
for creating constructive, positive cultures in their organizations, and mak￾ing sure that this message reaches everyone. If this message permeates the 
culture of the organization, then not only will people communicate more 
effectively across the organization, they will also do so with those at the top 
of and outside the organization.
UPWARD AND OUTWARD
You can probably imagine dozens of ways to share everyday, com￾mon-sense advice that many people overlook, or don’t realize is impor￾tant. You don’t need to understand technical terminology, or server 
architecture, or binary code – just plain language and a desire to share 
useful information.
Using plain language to communicate information is critical to another 
group often seen as a distinct species within organizations: executives. Many 
clients will say to me, “But you don’t understand – we need to communicate 
at the highest levels!” Actually, I do understand; I worked directly for the 
group CEO of a global bank for several years. What he expected – clear, 
concise, factual information delivered as quickly as possible – was the oppo￾site of what many people think CEOs want. Which leads me to wonder…are 
CEOs aliens?34 Radical Reporting
Well, clearly many people think they have unearthly powers. Yet few stop 
to think that CEOs are busy people; as André Spicer says, “Executive atten￾tion is one of the most scarce resources within any large organisation.”7
Executive attention, though scarce, is often abused. Jane Bettany says, 
“I’ve seen board packs that are hundreds of pages long which seems unrea￾sonable to me. I saw one CEO pile up the executive/senior management 
team papers for six months, and the pile was taller than he was. Is that good 
use of a CEO’s time?”
The answer is clearly no – but where does this phenomenon come from?
Often it arises from people’s desire to show how much they know and 
have done. Many people feel insecure in their jobs and thus take any oppor￾tunity to demonstrate their value to the organization. Ola Bello feels this is 
human behavior common to all organizations: “Irrespective of size, senior 
management and executives are constantly balancing how they are per￾ceived, limited resources, proportionality, materiality, and the bottom line. I 
think what people have to lose gets in the way of effective communication 
mostly.”
I’ve seen 300–400-page reports – often in a font so small no person can 
reasonably read it – go to the people at the highest level. At least 90% of 
what is in those reports is either completely irrelevant or features a level of 
detail inappropriate for the board. The 10% that is material is often so 
badly written that readers cannot extract anything meaningful from it. 
Clearly, the cause of this is cultural. If people feel they have to waste other 
people’s time in a vain attempt to shore up their own job security, then 
something’s wrong in the organization.
Let’s now look at reporting outside the organization. Chapter 3 will fea￾ture case studies, but it’s worth spending time now seeing how reports with 
a low content-to-length ratio can affect not just an organization, but an 
entire sector.
Since the financial crisis of 2008, regulators have increased scrutiny (or 
the appearance of it, at least). Many financial services organizations have 
responded by increasing monitoring, leading to more reporting and bigger 
report-producing teams. Yet has any of this improved matters?
Consider what central banks have said in recent years about resilience 
in their respective systems. In December 2019, the Bank of England pub￾lished its report on the results of stress testing in UK banks. The report 
stated,
The 2019 annual cyclical scenario stress test (ACS) shows the UK bank￾ing system would be resilient to deep simultaneous recessions in the 
UK and global economies that are more severe overall than the global 
financial crisis, combined with large falls in asset prices and a separate 
stress of misconduct costs. It would therefore be able to continue to 
meet credit demand from UK households and businesses even in the 
unlikely event of these highly adverse conditions.8Communication within and among teams 35
This sounds extremely encouraging; however, the Bank canceled the exer￾cise in 2020 because of the Covid-19 pandemic.9 Only four months earlier 
it had expressed confidence that the banking system would cope with “deep 
simultaneous recessions in the UK and global economies that are more 
severe overall than the global financial crisis” – in other words, exactly what 
happened as a result of the pandemic. The 2019 report, incidentally, did not 
even mention the possibility of a pandemic.
The European Banking Authority also delayed its annual stress-testing 
exercise by a year in response to the pandemic.10 However, the European 
Central Bank and the US Federal Reserve and both published stress-test 
results reports in 202011, and included the Covid-19 pandemic in their 
considerations.
Why does this matter? It matters because the financial services sector – 
on which it’s fair to say the world depends – responds to its regulators. 
Banks’ reporting focuses on meeting regulatory standards, mirroring regu￾lators’ priorities and even language. But if a regulator itself isn’t reliable, 
then banks are spending a huge amount of time and money on an empty 
exercise. What’s more, the exercise itself produces variable and often ques￾tionable results, as Deloitte demonstrated in a review of Irish banks’ regula￾tory reports.12 In the meantime, what else could banks better spend their 
time doing?
Given how often banks – to take just one example – create a reporting 
industry, it’s worth questioning the value of the work. Numerous entire 
teams devote every day to producing reports – daily, weekly, monthly, quar￾terly, and annual. Once they finish the cycle, they start again, and multiple 
layers of management have to review, wordsmith, and argue about every 
version. The content of many reports overlaps, so there is not only duplica￾tion but also room for error in not carrying through every single change in 
one report to the others. It is no exaggeration to call this an industry.
The reports this industry produces go to executives and regulators, but 
for different reasons. Executives need reports to help them make decisions. 
Regulators need reports to check compliance. Therefore, many reports that 
go to both groups attempt to meet both their needs. This is difficult to 
achieve, and the result is often a lengthy report that doesn’t clearly meet 
either group’s objective easily. (Again, the Deloitte report indicates this.)
The risk to organizations from this situation is enormous. If reports don’t 
convey clearly what regulators need to know, organizations risk increased 
scrutiny, fines, possible bad press coverage, and even the loss of their license 
to operate. If the reports don’t give executives what they need to make deci￾sions, this could affect the survival of the organization itself. This is no exag￾geration – the sheer scale and impenetrability of many reports make this a 
certainty, as case studies in Chapter 3 will show.
Given that report-writing training is my livelihood, you may think I’m 
destroying my business model with this argument. But I’m not saying ban 
reports. I’m saying that what reporting teams currently produce often 36 Radical Reporting
introduces one of the biggest sources of uncertainty into the process. What 
should be a control – providing reliable information in a reader-friendly 
form to aid regulatory compliance and senior decision-making – under￾mines itself. It increases, rather than mitigates, many serious inherent risks, 
such as financial loss due to human error in decision-making, or regulatory 
fines.
Our shared goal must be more and better communication throughout and 
beyond organizations. This includes fewer but more useful reports in any 
organization, no matter how small or large. Quality, not quantity, should be 
everyone’s focus.
ACTIVITIES
• Map your own professional and team cultures to the analysis you did at 
the end of Chapter 1. How do your professional education and qualifica￾tions influence how you communicate? Do you assume your immediate 
colleagues share the same background and assumptions?
• Think of who – outside your team or department – you communicate 
with most often. Is it someone in a different part of your organization? 
A client? A regulator? How will their background and assumptions differ 
from yours?
• Look at an email, report, or other pieces of writing that you sent to this 
person. Did you receive the response you expected, wanted, or needed? 
If not, why not? Could different approaches to communication explain 
why?
• How do you communicate within your team and with other teams? Do 
face-to-face (including using videoconferencing) or telephone conver￾sations dominate? Or do you rely on sending written communications 
back and forth, creating an audit trail?
• How has your communication changed in recent years? Has working 
from home or remote working affected your working relationships and 
reporting?
• How does your organizational culture affect executive and regulatory 
reporting? Do you think there’s a tendency to include too much infor￾mation? How much attention do your reporting teams or colleagues pay 
to different audiences’ needs?Communication within and among teams 37
NOTES
1 Margaret Heffernan, Wilful Blindness: Why We Ignore the Obvious (London: 
Simon & Schuster, 2019), 43.
2 U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
www.nist.gov/
3 ISACA, Cobit, www.isaca.org/resources/cobit
4 The European Cyber Security Organisation (ECSO) Users Committee, Survey 
Analysis Report: Chief Information Security Officers’ (CISO) Challenges & 
Priorities, April, 2021, https://ecs-org.eu/documents/uploads/uc-ciso-survey-anal￾ysis-report.pdf, 49 (bold in original).
5 Ibid., 49.
6 Marc van Zadelhoff, “The Biggest Cybersecurity Threats Are Inside Your 
Company,” Harvard Business Review, September 19, 2016, https://hbr.
org/2016/09/the-biggest-cybersecurity-threats-are-inside-your-company. For more 
recent insights, see UK Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport, “Cyber 
Security Breaches Survey 2021,” March 24, 2021, Cyber Security Breaches Survey 
2021 - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk).
SUMMARY
• We have looked further at cultural and organizational factors in commu￾nication. What may seem obvious can change drastically depending on 
the reader’s or listener’s background, context, or objectives.
• Just because people work in the same organization doesn’t mean that 
they share the same assumptions, values, and objectives.
• Given how many waking hours we spend working, it is logical to assume 
that our teammates share our views and priorities. But sometimes the 
familiarity we think will create the perfect conditions for effective com￾munication backfires.
• We all need to be aware of the gap between one’s professional group 
culture and others, without overstating differences. IT specialists are 
often the most conscious of the need to adapt their terminology and 
approach to non-specialists.
• Communication isn’t only problematic within and among teams. Some of 
the most business-critical writing goes to executives and regulators, for 
different reasons. However, if reports don’t convey accurately and clearly 
what executives or regulators need to know, organizations risk serious 
consequences, as Chapter 3 will show.38 Radical Reporting
7 Spicer, Business Bullshit, 133.
8 Bank of England Financial Policy Committee, Financial Stability Report, 
December, 2019, www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/financial-stability￾report/2019/december-2019.pdf?la=en&hash=99431A541357AC6D601A99B9
50455E2344C12901
9 Kalyeena Makortoff, “Bank of England cancels stress tests for UK’s biggest lend￾ers,” The Guardian, March 20, 2020, www.theguardian.com/business/2020/
mar/20/bank-of-england-cancels-stress-tests-for-uk-biggest-lenders-coronavirus
10 European Banking Authority, “EBA updates on 2021 EU-wide stress test timeline, 
sample and potential future changes to its framework,” July 30, 2020, www.eba.
europa.eu/eba-updates-2021-eu-wide-stress-test-timeline-sample-and-potential￾future-changes-its-framework
11 European Central Bank, “Euro area banking sector resilient to stress caused by 
coronavirus, ECB analysis shows,” July 28, 2020, www.bankingsupervision.
europa.eu/press/pr/date/2020/html/ssm.pr200728~7df9502348.en.html; Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Reserve Board releases 
results of stress tests for 2020 and additional sensitivity analyses conducted in 
light of the coronavirus event,” June 25, 2020, www.federalreserve.gov/newsev￾ents/pressreleases/bcreg20201218b.htm
12 Deloitte, “Solvency and Financial Condition Report (SFCR): Spotlight on year 
one disclosures,” www2.deloitte.com/ie/en/pages/financial-services/articles/sol￾vency-and-financial-condition-report.htmlDOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-4 39
Chapter 3
Clarity
The theory
The first two chapters have discussed the unconscious and subconscious 
factors affecting how we communicate. These include everything from 
national culture to team-specific specialist training, all of which conditions 
us to see the world and articulate it in a particular way. Unsurprisingly, 
our reports will reflect this worldview, sometimes to the detriment of clear 
communication.
This chapter takes us further into the realm of conscious and unconscious 
thought. However, now you will see even more examples that relate directly 
to your everyday writing. By bridging the gap between our assumptions and 
words, we can produce clearer, better, more useful writing.
The first principle is that clear thinking and clear writing are linked. If you 
are unclear about your own thoughts, how can you possibly articulate them 
clearly? This may seem obvious, but under the pressure of reporting dead￾lines and corporate expectations, clarity is often a casualty.
This insight is not new. In his 1946 article “Politics and the English 
Language,” George Orwell discussed many of the bad habits humans fall 
into when trying to communicate. What is more useful, though, is his point 
that humans often deliberately exploit bad habits to communicate badly – 
to obscure, mislead or simply lie. He called these a “catalogue of swindles 
and perversions”1 – swindles and perversions many of you will recognize as 
standard in your workplace.
Words matter. We know this, which is why, depending on our cultural 
conditioning, we favor or shy away from certain terms. We know that they 
are likely to produce a particular response, whether good or bad. So far, so 
normal – this is what communication should be about. We think of what we 
have to say and why, and how we want our reader or listener to act; we then 
choose the words likeliest to prompt that result.
How often, though, do we do the exact opposite? Instead of choosing our 
words to produce a particular effect on the reader, and resulting action, we 
speak or write as if on autopilot. Then we wonder why people yawn in 
meetings, furrow their brow in confusion over reports, and fail to take the 
action we expect. This, unsurprisingly, is the opposite of what clarity should 
achieve.40 Radical Reporting
We all recognize the truth of what I’ve just described; nevertheless, we 
persist. Why? I suggest there are several underlying, very human, factors: 
habit, tiredness, and fear.
HABIT
Habit takes us back, in part, to the previous two chapters. Whether we 
speak about cultural conditioning or corporate expectations, we all create 
habits that, for the most part, serve us well. If we are speaking to someone 
from our own culture, or from another one we understand well (or even 
better, speak the language of), we use shortcuts in wording and reason￾ing, confident the other person will understand. Similarly, if a cybersecurity 
expert meets a peer at a specialist conference, they can happily discuss the 
latest trends using the technical terms common in their field. Where there is 
shared understanding, these habits are effective and efficient.
When, though, do they become counterproductive? First, when the habits 
are those of using terms carelessly. Carelessly can mean without considering 
the actual meaning; it can also mean using a term to mean multiple things, 
without clarifying one’s own meaning. One excellent example, which I will 
carry through this chapter, is “issue.”
What do people mean when they use the word “issue”? Without context, 
it’s difficult to know; it can mean a problem, an audit or other finding, a 
topic of conversation – even children. (“He died without issue in 1756.”)
Most reports I have read – and at the time of writing, I estimate these to 
be well over 3,500 – use the word “issue” to mean both “finding” and “prob￾lem.” Now, in audit, risk, and compliance reports, an “issue” meaning a 
“finding” will usually report a problem. Someone isn’t adhering to certain 
controls, so the organization is at risk. Some people also use the term “issue” 
to mean a risk that has materialized, moving from something that may hap￾pen to something that has happened. (I prefer to call this kind of situation an 
“event” or “incident.”) So, even within a specific professional context – audit, 
risk, and compliance – there is room for misunderstanding.
In other settings, though, it can be even more unclear. Imagine an internal 
memo in which the writer mentions “issues around resource.” Leaving aside 
the now-common all-purpose use of the preposition “around” to mean 
“about,” “with,” “on,” and so on, this sentence is unclear. What does the 
writer mean? I have seen this exact wording in dozens of reports, and not 
once has it been clear what it signifies exactly. Does it mean that there aren’t 
enough members of staff? That there are enough, but they haven’t received 
training? Or that there are enough, all fully trained – but they still can’t do 
what they should? Each interpretation gives us a different problem to solve: 
either hiring more people, training those we have hired, or going back to the 
recruitment and training process to see which flaws in the process have cre￾ated the situation.Clarity: the theory 41
Clearly, phrases such as “issues around resource” don’t inform the 
reader. They’re wasted opportunities to communicate specific information 
and prompt reflection or action. What they are is a habit – exactly what 
Orwell described when he said that in modern English, “prose consists less 
and less of words chosen for the sake of their meaning, and more and more 
of phrases tacked together like the sections of a prefabricated 
hen-house.”2
Using language in a clear, fresh, useful way is a hard habit to develop and 
requires going against what may be corporate habit and culture. By ques￾tioning the words you and others are using, you may be questioning assump￾tions and even people’s sense of belonging. After all, using the same language 
as everyone else makes you part of the tribe.
Some psychologists point out that we are mental misers: we often pre￾fer the ease of hanging on to old views over the difficulty of grappling 
with new ones. Yet there are also deeper forces behind our resistance to 
rethinking. Questioning ourselves makes the world more unpredictable. 
It requires us to admit the facts may have changed, that what was once 
right may now be wrong. Reconsidering something we believe deeply 
can threaten our identities, making it feel as if we’re losing a part of 
ourselves.3
I’m sure you can all think of times when you have, out of habit or under 
pressure, created a report by selecting a standard phrase, adding a sen￾tence your supervisor approved in a previous report, and copied boiler￾plate wording from your organization’s intranet. You probably knew at 
the time it was a shortcut, and not an effective one, either. But you were 
under pressure to finish drafting the report, and these wordings were 
already available, so why not use them? After all, no one can then blame 
you – they’re clearly acceptable in your workplace, so you risk nothing by 
using them.
Nothing, that is, except clarity and meaningful action.
We may think of habits as things we actively cultivate, but the linguistic 
habits we’re discussing here often make their way into our brains unbidden. 
The novelist David Foster Wallace, discussing language with the lawyer and 
language expert Bryan A. Garner, described the process perfectly.
On another level, when a vogue word – to dialogue, to proactively dia￾logue, or something – when it enters the mainstream, I think it becomes 
trendy because a great deal of listening, talking, and writing for many 
people takes place below the level of consciousness. It happens very 
fast. They don’t pay very much attention, and they’ve heard it a lot. It 
kind of enters into the nervous system. They get the idea, without it ever 
being conscious, that this is the good, current, credible way to say this, 
and they spout it back.442 Radical Reporting
If this sounds familiar, don’t beat yourself up about it – well, not too much. 
Even Orwell recognized the all-too-human instincts behind this writ￾ing-by-numbers approach: “The attraction of this way of writing is that it 
is easy.”5 It is easier – it’s quicker, it feels safer, and therefore it’s the most 
tempting option when writing in a hurry. However, it’s a wasted economy. 
If it allows you to produce that draft more quickly, what happens when 
your manager reviews it? If your organization is lucky, the manager will 
immediately recognize the clichéd shortcuts and will ask you to re-draft, to 
clarify.
If your organization is less lucky – and is typical of many organizations 
– the manager will be so used to seeing this writing style that he or she will 
not see the problem. It’s possible that the manager will recognize the draft 
as being hard to read, but, being equally conditioned by the organization’s 
reliance on unclear writing, will try to fix the problem by adding…more 
unclear writing. Chapter 9 will discuss the reviewing process and how often 
both ego and habit conspire to make it counterproductive. (It will also 
advise you on how to improve the process.)
However, the likeliest situation is that the manager will not read the draft 
closely – it’s too vague and impenetrable for that – but will assume it means 
what he or she thinks it should mean. It then goes up the management chain, 
however long or short, with each “reviewer” spending valuable time reading 
the unreadable, adding some further wording to put a personal stamp on it 
and show they’ve done their job, and sending it on. By the time the final 
report goes out, it is a collection of various people’s bad habits, personal 
quirks, and unconscious regurgitations of whatever verbiage is fashionable 
that week. It’s certainly not a clear communication of important informa￾tion that senior decision-makers need to take action.
This is clearly a waste of time and effort, but many organizations persist 
in writing without thinking of readers. As I’ve just explained, writing that 
taxes the readers’ brains is writing that goes nowhere.
Writers specializing in the neurological impact of reading confirm this. 
Bill Birchard emphasizes what a relief it is for readers not to tax their brains. 
“People’s brains work faster when processing less, whether it’s processing 
words, pictures, objects, or ideas. They in turn love how you ease their men￾tal load, or as scientists say, boost ‘processing fluency.’”6
 Boosting readers’ “processing fluency” in turn improves decision-making. 
So, if your corporate habit is to produce wordy, convoluted writing, it 
almost guarantees two negative results. First, most readers won’t read it, or 
may start but abandon it. Todd Rogers and Jessica Lasky-Fink discovered 
that, 
In a recent survey we conducted with around 1,800 working profes￾sionals, they estimated that they delete about half of the emails they 
receive without reading them. …This is a striking result when you think Clarity: the theory 43
about it from a cognitive perspective. Busy readers routinely decide how 
valuable a message is without actually reading it!7 
All this arises from habit. As I mentioned earlier, habits are human, and 
they can be good – effective, efficient, productive – as well as bad. However, 
we tend to fall back on bad habits when we are under pressure, stressed, 
and, above all, tired.
TIREDNESS
Don’t underestimate tiredness. Many, if not most, people you interact with 
at work will be tired. Maybe they have too much work, or think they do; 
maybe they have problems at home, or are unwell. In any case, they will not 
have time, energy, or mental stamina to spare.
As writers, when we find ourselves tired for any reason, it is tempting to 
choose the easy option. Shortcuts save the very time, energy, and mental 
stamina that we lack. As Orwell wrote, this approach means that “you save 
much mental effort, at the cost of leaving your meaning vague, not only for 
your reader but for yourself.”8 After all, as Margaret Heffernan reminds us, 
“Too often, actually thinking about or reflecting on a decision that we face 
is far too taxing.”9 Working out what we mean and then choosing our lan￾guage carefully to convey it is indeed taxing.
Furthermore, we make decisions in doing so: How exactly do I tell senior 
managers about their incredibly expensive IT project that’s not going to 
work? Is it my place to do so? Can I refer vaguely to some superficial work 
done by our external auditors last year and avoid saying anything more 
specific? How will they react? Will it affect my job? Could I phrase things in 
a way that makes it look as though I’ve done my part – producing a report 
– while not saying anything that can come back to bite me?
These are all indeed taxing questions; they’re unpleasant, and the answers 
available hardly less so. As with the manager reviewing an unclear report, 
you could ask hard questions and insist on clear answers. Or you could take 
the easier, more obvious, option and continue to express yourself vaguely. 
This is certainly a short-term option – but it leads to greater risk in the 
medium and long term, not only for you, but also for the organization.
It’s hard to force yourself to avoid that risk. Orwell writes of the discipline 
needed to work out what we have to say, and the fewest, most precise words 
to say it; however, as we’ve all seen, we don’t have to do this.
But you are not obliged to go to all this trouble. You can shirk it by 
simply throwing your mind open and letting the ready-made phrases 
come crowding in. They will construct your sentences for you – even 
think your thoughts for you, to a certain extent – and at need they 
will perform the important service of partially concealing your meaning 
even from yourself.1044 Radical Reporting
This raises the question of why would you want to conceal your meaning 
from yourself. I can think of several reasons. Perhaps you’re too close to 
the material you’re trying to articulate. You don’t, with the best will in the 
world, have the necessary distance to see what is and isn’t clear to someone 
else, without your expert knowledge.
Perhaps you are under pressure and falling back on the “safe,” manager￾approved linguistic habits of the team or organization.
Or maybe you’re afraid of what will happen if you do tell those senior 
managers their IT project won’t work.
FEAR
It can be difficult to work in audit, risk, compliance, and IT. Leaving aside 
specialist terminology, often what people in these areas are saying is that 
something has gone wrong. There is a problem, or there is likely to be a 
problem. There is a risk.
It is absolutely normal to feel apprehensive about delivering bad news; we 
wouldn’t be human if we didn’t feel this way at least sometimes. And, as we 
showed in Chapter 1, certain cultures are more actively evasive in the face 
of potential conflict. Whether it’s down to cultural value in “saving face,” or 
having grown up equating direct speech with aggression, it can be hard for 
people to convey unpleasant but necessary information.
Perhaps this is why the Institute of Internal Auditors has, in its new Global 
Internal Audit Standards, made the very first Standard (1.1) “Honesty and 
Professional Courage.” Mindful of the pressures those in assurance func￾tions can face – after all, we rarely deliver good news – the Standard charges 
the chief audit executive with leading and protecting the team. “The chief 
audit executive must maintain a work environment where internal auditors 
feel supported when expressing legitimate, evidence-based engagement 
results, whether favorable or unfavorable.”
Organizations are no different, and the “tone at the top” discussed in 
Chapter 2 reveals what people seek, accept, or avoid. If a board or senior 
decision-making committee actively encourages dissenting views, extensive 
research, or plain language, it’s likely their colleagues will be less fearful of 
delivering bad news. However, if the highest levels of the organization 
encourage groupthink, superficial reasoning, or evasive corporatespeak, fear 
will spread.
In Wilful Blindness, Margaret Heffernan expertly describes and dissects 
the all-too-human tendency to quash individual insights and behavior in 
favor of communal norms. This tendency arises from tactics necessary for 
survival, and many people would say it’s still necessary to survive in their 
workplaces.Clarity: the theory 45
But what does that mean for the survival of the workplace – of the 
organization?
Wells Fargo gives an example of what happens when those who should 
lead – chief audit executives and chief risk officers, for example – don’t. In a 
damning federal judgment, Judge Christopher B. McNeil fined both the 
chief audit executive and the chief risk officer of Wells Fargo for multiple 
failings, not least in misleading reports and other communications. 
Respondent McLinko [the Chief Audit Executive] failed to maintain 
independence and objectivity in his relations with the head of the 
Community Bank, Ms. Tolstedt, and the Community Bank’s Group 
Risk Officer, Ms. Russ Anderson. This included his strong endorsements 
of Ms. Tolstedt’s risk management practices notwithstanding his review 
of the independent audit report indicating that more than 1.4 million 
accounts had potentially been subject to simulated funding and not￾withstanding his review of the 2016 report by the OCC examiners find￾ing the Community Bank’s sales practices risk management was unsafe 
or unsound. It also included his cloying praise of both Ms. Tolstedt and 
Ms. Russ Anderson in correspondence exchanged throughout 2013 to 
2016, at a time when neither Ms. Tolstedt nor Ms. Russ Anderson were 
willing to acknowledge the root cause of team member misconduct.11
An internal investigation report from 2004 warned of the financial and 
reputational losses Wells Fargo would go on to suffer. “However,” as 
Srinvisavan Ragothaman, Tyler Custis, and Melissa Christianson note in 
their analysis of the scandal, “this report failed to make an impact on senior 
managers. Additionally, internal auditors failed to continue to press this 
issue for the next several years as the fraud ran rampant.”12
You may feel the Wells Fargo case is an extreme one – but organizations 
every day succeed or fail because of their communication skills. 
CLARITY AND SUCCESS
“Sadly,” writes André Spicer, “well-reasoned words are rare in corporate 
life.”13 Whether through habit, tiredness, or fear, people write a lot – and 
most of it is bad: wordy, unclear, often pretentious.
But why does it matter? It matters because unclear writing betrays either 
unclear thinking or the intent to deceive. It’s worrying enough when people 
write badly to actively mislead the reader, or hide the unpalatable; worse 
yet when they do it unthinkingly, simply because this is what they’ve 
always done.
It matters because when people write badly, organizations suffer. They 
are inefficient internally because employees waste time and energy clarify￾ing points. When people don’t clarify matters, though, they will fail to take 46 Radical Reporting
necessary action. Why would they? They didn’t realize the report was tell￾ing them to.
Organizations also suffer externally. Ironically, most people who write 
badly in organizations quickly spot wordy, unclear, pretentious, or evasive 
language when they receive it. Give them a press release from the utility 
company that has just had to confess to overcharging, or from their favorite 
online retailer who has admitted exploiting workers. If the press release is in 
managementspeak, even those who inflict it on others will see the telltale 
signs of evasiveness and falsehood. Even companies who should know bet￾ter resort to this almost instinctively: “The great enemy of clear language is 
insincerity. When there is a gap between one’s real and one’s declared aims, 
one turns as it were instinctively to long words and exhausted idioms, like a 
cuttlefish spurting out ink.”14
One example of this is from the executive summary of the official report 
on BP’s Deepwater Horizon accident investigation. The report itself is con￾cise, clear, and straightforward, even for a layperson. However, the first page 
of text ends with these two sentences:
Wherever appropriate, the report indicates the source or nature of the 
information on which analysis has been based or conclusions have been 
reached. Where such references would be overly repetitive or might 
otherwise confuse the presentation, evidentiary references have been 
omitted.15
What impression does this create? Would you have confidence in the ensuing 
executive summary and indeed report? Or would you feel the writers were 
seeking to evade and excuse? You wouldn’t be alone in saying the latter.
And yet I have sympathy for the writers of those sentences. (I think we can 
assume the report was written by committee.) They knew the report wouldn’t 
have good news, and they also knew that they didn’t have all the answers 
they or the readers expected. In those circumstances, it’s normal to write 
something alerting the reader to any gaps or limitations. How else could the 
writers have expressed this entirely reasonable point? They could have been 
more direct and simple, saying something like, “This report gives the source 
and nature of information wherever possible. Where we feel evidence is 
repetitive or potentially confusing, we have put it in the appendix.”
Perhaps my re-write over-simplifies, but the effect is completely different 
from the original. It says that the writers trust the readers. Instead of a pater￾nalistic and patronizing message (“We decide what’s appropriate, and we 
know how easily confused you get”), it says “There’s a lot of information 
here, so we’ve organized it in a way we hope is clear and useful to you.”
We’ll return to this example in Chapter 4, to see in more detail how struc￾ture and word choice create such different impressions in the two versions. 
However, the difference between the two versions can be the difference 
between failure and success in handling a disaster.Clarity: the theory 47
BP’s share price plummeted after the accident, but better communication 
could have mitigated this. It seems obvious, yet many organizations persist 
in failing to make the connection between clear writing in plain language 
and good performance. There is indeed one, as author and writing expert 
Rupert Morris demonstrated nearly 20 years ago, with his Clarity Index.16
This simple graph showed a compelling correlation between clarity and 
performance. Morris and his colleagues studied the annual reports of FTSE 
100 companies and analyzed them for clarity: simple, short words and sen￾tences, favoring the active voice.17 (Chapter 4 will go into these attributes in 
more detail.)
They then tracked the organizations with the clearest writing against 
average stock-market performance 2002–2003. As you can see, the top line 
shows that those organizations with clear, simple, reader-friendly reports 
consistently outperformed the FTSE 100 and therefore their peers.
Another positive example comes from the US, from Berkshire Hathaway, 
the investment company chaired by Warren E. Buffett. Few would dispute 
either the company’s or its leader’s success. Is there a connection between 
this success and clarity? I think so.
Berkshire Hathaway’s annual reports are in the public domain, and the 
most revealing part of them is Buffett’s annual letter to shareholders.
One of my favorite examples of Buffett’s plain-language style comes from 
his 2012 letter. In it, on page 1, he starts with a brief paragraph (80 words 
across four sentences) setting out headline figures.48 Radical Reporting
He then writes, “A number of good things happened at Berkshire last year, 
but let’s first get the bad news out of the way.” He provides a bulleted list of 
“failures” that take up the rest of the page, with the last point on the page 
being, “The second disappointment in 2012 was my inability to make a 
major acquisition. I pursued a couple of elephants, but came up empty￾handed.” It’s not until a third of the way down the next page that he says, 
“Now to some good news from 2012[.]”18
You could say that his style is folksy, and that that won’t go down well in 
your organization; you may well be right. The point is that wherever you 
look in his letters to shareholders, from whichever year, you will find plain 
language. There is no attempt to evade, obscure, or sugarcoat.
What’s more, throughout his letter, he demonstrates true executive 
accountability. When something goes badly, he uses the word “I.” When 
things go to plan, he says “we.” And when he wants to praise a particular 
aspect of the company’s performance, he names others – not himself – as 
deserving the credit. He credits them by name, and says “they.” This is far 
removed from many people’s experience of managerial accountability, which 
sadly often sees the most senior people claiming the rewards for success, 
while blaming others when things go wrong.
In Buffett’s letters, we see the confidence of a person and organization 
prepared to say openly what they have done, why, and how, whether it has 
succeeded or failed. When the confidence exists to communicate clearly 
within an organization, it inspires confidence outside an organization.
LACK OF CLARITY – AND FAILURE
Let’s consider now some counter-examples, where the “tone at the top” dis￾couraged plain language and clear writing. One obvious one would be prac￾tically anything from the UK banking system leading up to the 2008 financial 
crisis. Michael Lewis has written compellingly about the systemic failures and 
groupthink that allowed the crisis to develop and failed to mitigate its risks.19
However, a BBC News online article from the year of the crisis summa￾rized handily the way in which reporting language enabled problems to 
continue and worsen.20 In it, a risk manager from HBOS (one of the two 
UK government-rescued banks) tells the reporter that “We were constantly 
being pushed back and constantly being told that things had to be put in a 
way that wasn’t going to upset the business – basically that wasn’t going to 
stand in the way of the sales culture at the time.” Who was “pushing back” 
and telling people not to “upset the business”? The head of risk, who led 
the function.
Organizational leaders generally choose how to communicate; they know 
perfectly well the difference between clear and unclear writing. André Spicer 
takes Nokia as an example, usefully contrasting clear, plain communication 
(the CEO’s famous “burning platform” email) with turgid, evasive, Clarity: the theory 49
corporate jargon-laden memos about looming redundancies. He also 
describes the culture of fear within the organization, discouraging clear 
communication and ultimately truth-telling.21
Another corporate example of bad practice was GM, which Margaret 
Heffernan discusses at length in Wilful Blindness. Not only did the culture 
at GM discourage clear communication, it ran internal training on how to 
avoid it. In his report to GM management about ignition switch recalls, 
Anton R. Valukas refers to “tone at the top” and corporate culture. In the 
section of his report entitled “Resistance to Raising Issues” (and “issues” is 
a gentle term, remember), he describes an atmosphere of not simply resis￾tance but outright repression. Not only did employees trying to report prob￾lems encounter “pushback,” they were told how to express themselves.
“Employees were given a number of words to avoid, with suggested 
replacements,” Valukas writes. Instead of “Problem,” they could use “Issue, 
Condition, Matter.” Similarly, instead of reporting a defect, staff members 
were told to say, “Does not perform to design.” 22
I’m sure many of you can think of similar examples you’ve encountered 
in the workplace, hopefully with less severe consequences. Empty slogans, 
lazy buzzwords, and positive messages at all costs are a misuse of language 
and can lead to disaster.
Other corporate scandals show how difficult it can be for those supposed 
to advise organizations to do so. If there is a resistance, either within the 
organization or from major clients, to receiving necessary but unpleasant 
news, it’s bound to compound any eventual problems. In the world of audit, 
external auditors can find themselves in a difficult position. Many bright 
graduates are eager to join household-name companies (many of which 
have been implicated in various accountancy scandals, from Greece’s entry 
to the Eurozone to Tesco’s misstatement in its accounts in the UK). Once 
there, they may find themselves working on a major client account, provid￾ing assurance over key financial controls.
There is, however, a potential conflict: if the client doesn’t want to hear, 
for example, that its own accounting procedures are poor, what is an ambi￾tious young external auditor to do? The big-name accounting firm may rely 
on that client, and a rolling contract for services, for both income and cred￾ibility. In such circumstances, it’s not impossible for a junior external audi￾tor to be encouraged to quash findings to please the client.
I know of several who moved into internal audit so as to retain objectivity 
and independence. However, internal auditors are also subject to pressure of 
a different kind, as internal politics play out through reports. In the world 
of audit, both external and internal auditors do the best they can under dif￾ferent circumstances. After all, their roles and skills, while often overlap￾ping, are distinct. But it is fundamentally the corporate cultures they must 
work with that dictate how clearly they are allowed to communicate, and 
therefore how well they can do their jobs.50 Radical Reporting
Mark Carawan, quoted in Chapter 1 on the common ground between 
internal and external audit, has seen how topical corporate culture has 
become:
Ultimately, people’s behaviors shape an organization’s culture, and peo￾ple change as individuals themselves, as well as there being a constant 
flow of individuals into, around, and out of an organization – nothing 
and no one is static. There has been much written about how incentive 
structures (monetary and others) are a major factor in driving behav￾iors, how leaders create “tone from the top” and cast the “shadow 
of the leader”, how the middle management “marzipan” or “perma￾frost” layer is resistant to change, and other aspects of organizational 
behavior.
So far, we have looked at cases where those at the top have deliberately 
chosen to use vague or misleading language to obscure the truth. It can also 
happen inadvertently, often because of cultural differences, but also out of 
habit and corporate conditioning.
One good example of this comes – again – from financial services. You 
may remember the LIBOR scandal of 2012, when we learned that traders 
had been fixing overnight currency rates for years. As part of the investiga￾tions, emails among senior people in US and UK banking were made public, 
and the UK Parliament issued a report.
This report includes transcripts of interviews, including with the then￾chairman of Barclays, Marcus Agius. When asked why he hadn’t commu￾nicated the regulator’s “concerns” to a new appointee, Agius gave a 
perfect example of corporate semantics and the wriggle room they create. 
“I would challenge the word ‘concerns’,” he stated. “That letter raises 
four issues and they are called ‘issues’. The word ‘concerns’ I do not 
believe appears. I am not being pedantic but there is a difference between 
‘these are issues which I would like to raise with you’ and ‘concerns’, 
which means ‘I’m worried.’”23
The report’s commentary on this exchange is restrained – perhaps too 
much so: “Barclays appears to have regarded the points raised by Mr Sants 
as ‘issues’ rather than ‘concerns’. On the basis of the evidence it is unclear 
whether Barclays ‘got the message’.”24 In saying this, the report allows this 
language to stand. It’s possible that Barclays feigned innocent bewilder￾ment at the use of “issues” rather than “concerns.” It’s also possible Barclays 
was genuinely confused – that the bank’s hierarchy of corporate euphe￾mism at the time did indeed rate “issues” lower than “concerns.” 
Compounding all of this is the report’s typically British coyness, stating 
that things are “unclear” – there’s simply been a misunderstanding. Move 
along – nothing to see here.
Perhaps those in the UK banking system would have acted more quickly 
and decisively had anyone said, at any point, “This is fraud. It’s a problem.” Clarity: the theory 51
Then again, had anyone done so, the others would have had no excuse for 
taking action. This perhaps explains why vague, misleading language is so 
useful. It creates the perfect environment to avoid the unpleasant business of 
delivering bad news, establishing responsibility, and accepting criticism.
Even when criticism is clear, it can be difficult for organizations to turn it 
into meaningful and positive change. After the financial crisis, the UK 
Parliament investigated the role of the then-regulator, the Financial Services 
Authority (FSA). The resulting report stated – in a refreshingly direct way – 
that “By any measure the FSA has failed dreadfully in its supervision of the 
banking sector,” which is clear criticism by any standard.25 One would 
expect major reform after such stinging words.
The FSA did indeed change: by 2013, it had split into two bodies, the 
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) and the Prudential Regulation Authority 
(PRA). However, did the culture change? If we gauge an organization’s cul￾ture by its ability to communicate clearly, the evidence is mixed. As recently 
as 2019, the FCA produced a 77-word sentence as part of a final notice 
against a bank it had investigated and found against:
On the basis of the facts and matters described below, SCB 
breached Regulations 14(3), 15(1) and 20(1), and failed to comply 
with Regulations 7(1) to (3), 8(1) and (3), and 14(4) of the Money 
Laundering Regulations 2007 (the “ML Regulations”) by failing to 
establish and maintain risk-sensitive policies and procedures, and failing 
to require its non-EEA branches and subsidiaries to apply UK-equivalent 
anti-money laundering and counter terrorist financing (“AML”) stand￾ards regarding customer Due Diligence and ongoing monitoring.26
So a full ten years after the House of Commons’ clear criticism, and six 
years after a costly and complex restructuring, the UK regulator was still 
producing reports that didn’t communicate effectively. Keeping in mind 
that this regulator publishes all its final notices, it’s reasonable to expect a 
degree of clarity and conciseness. After all, how can the taxpayer and other 
interested parties keep abreast of what regulators and other enforcement 
agencies are doing, if they cannot read their work easily?
It’s telling that in the early 2000s, I used excerpts from Enron’s final let￾ter to shareholders27 during training. It was as an example of corporate 
waffle – throwing sand in readers’ eyes, or squirting out cuttlefish ink to 
blind them. Everyone agreed, possibly with the benefit of hindsight, that 
the language was clearly designed to intimidate and impress, but not to 
inform. A few years later, around the time of the financial crisis, I saw 
people thinking the best way to safeguard their jobs, in times of mass redun￾dancies, was to increase the verbiage in their writing. So I changed my 
approach – I would show clients an excerpt from Enron and an excerpt 
from their own writing, and ask which they found clearer. They were horri￾fied to see that their own work was no clearer than Enron’s.52 Radical Reporting
Now, in many organizations across the globe, I meet clients whose work 
makes Enron’s look like a model of clarity and transparency. While it’s 
encouraging to know that people recognize they need help to write better, 
it’s worrying that increasing job insecurity and non-stop work pressure 
make them likelier to write badly to begin with.
Remember the example I gave in Chapter 1, where the risk team hid the 
fact of fraud so as not to upset the managers committing it? Recall the 
example in this chapter, where the BBC reported on how HBOS’ risk 
function diluted its reports to please senior staff? If you find yourself told 
to write reports to spare senior managers’ or clients’ feelings, you should 
ask why.
Obviously, if your reports include personal attacks, maybe your manager 
has a point – there’s a reason why we often ascribe problems (not issues!) to 
“lack of management awareness” or “lack of diligence.” It’s more acceptable 
than saying “The managers are stupid and lazy,” after all.
However, if your managers are encouraging you to avoid using clear lan￾guage to say that there are problems, and what they are, when you have 
compelling evidence for it…maybe there are further problems. Maybe your 
organization has a culture that prefers to hide problems behind vague lan￾guage. If so, the organization could face far more serious problems than a 
few senior managers’ hurt feelings.
EGO AND OVERCOMPENSATION
André Spicer writes compellingly about how badly organizations encour￾age people to express themselves. The fear factor I’ve mentioned explains 
why many people’s egos are bound up with how they write. It goes beyond 
cultural and profession-specific elements discussed in Chapters 1 and 2. It’s 
more about how they position themselves in the organization, how they 
safeguard their perceived status or even their job. Never underestimate how 
many people fear losing their work, salary, and identity.
This means that every report becomes an opportunity to showcase the 
writer’s (or writers’) knowledge, experience, and hard work. There’s noth￾ing wrong with using all of these to provide information to people. The 
problem arises when the information comes second to the exercise of 
“showing off.” This can take the form of using long words and compli￾cated sentences (“Look how clever I am!”),28 referring to true but irrele￾vant side-topics (“I’m not just a cybersecurity analyst – I also know about 
juggling!”), or including minute detail (“Look how much research I 
did!”). 
Weaning people off this habit can be difficult. They fear that without the 
verbiage, people will lose respect for them. This overlooks two crucial facts: 
the verbiage is stopping people from reading the text, and anyone who does 
read is likely to think less of the author for making their life so difficult. As Clarity: the theory 53
Bill Birchard advises, “Don’t worry that simplicity will dumb down your 
writing. Great writers have shown for centuries that plain words serve just 
fine even for cosmic concepts.”29
What, then, instead of plain words, tends to fill most pages? We could call 
it managementspeak, corporatespeak, business buzzwords, or sometimes 
something even ruder (as André Spicer does). It’s – as we will see in Chapter 
4 – the limited but empty wording people reach for simply to fill air or 
space. As Orwell said, this kind of verbiage serves two purposes: to speak or 
write without having to think, and to confuse. Many people will admit to 
the first one; few to the second. After all, the second implies a deliberate 
wish to deceive, which in turn implies incompetence or wrongdoing. No 
wonder few will admit to it.
We can add a third purpose, which is ego and overcompensation, both 
of which take us back to fear. Fear of not fitting in; fear of not being val￾ued or respected; fear of losing status. All these fears operate in the work￾place. We can all think of colleagues, managers, and clients who exhibit 
classic defensive or even aggressive behavior to compensate for these and 
other fears.
A more common and often acceptable way of managing these fears is to 
use managementspeak. It’s an easy way to show belonging to a group. For 
junior members of staff, parroting the latest fashionable phrase, no matter 
how confusing or meaningless, reassures them that they are showing their 
commitment to the team. For those eager to climb the corporate ladder, 
speaking in almost entirely content-free sentences may seem a sure way to 
demonstrate their managerial skills. The irony is that many people at the top 
of the corporate ladder prefer short, clear communication. As one CEO told 
me, “If you can’t tell me what’s happening in half a sheet of paper, then 
either you don’t know, or you’re trying to hide something.” This may seem 
harsh, but I’ve discovered it’s often true.
Equally often, it’s simply a case of misunderstanding what good commu￾nication means. Conditioned by corporate habit, many people lose the abil￾ity to talk to others in simple, human terms. I remember one colleague 
whose weekly updates were utterly impenetrable. One day, the manager told 
me and others that our confusion and boredom were becoming apparent 
during this colleague’s updates. Why not, he suggested, focus closely on 
what the colleague was saying so that we could ask specific questions when 
he finished?
Let’s leave aside the question of why the manager didn’t encourage the 
colleague to express himself more clearly. My assumption was that he had, 
but it hadn’t worked. Instead, we all strained our brains as this colleague 
proudly stated that his team had “leveraged blue-sky thinking going for￾ward on an ongoing basis to benchmark continuous improvement in a 
world-class operational environment.” We went quiet, then politely but ner￾vously said, “OK – that sounds impressive. What exactly has the team 
done?” The colleague in question was at first self-conscious as he struggled 54 Radical Reporting
for words. We had asked him to abandon managementspeak and tell us, in 
plain language, what had happened. It was an uncomfortable moment for 
him and for us, as were the next few meetings.
We continued to ask him direct questions and to encourage him to give 
direct answers. Finally, he came out with answers such as, “My team looked 
at what peer banks are doing and created a list of good ideas we can use.” 
That was something we could all understand and congratulate him and the 
team for. It was clear that they had done something we would be able to use. 
However, it took weeks to get this colleague to leave his linguistic comfort 
zone and start communicating clearly. He wasn’t and isn’t alone: as André 
Spicer has pointed out, managementspeak can reassure insecure middle 
managers that they are doing the right thing.30
This is typical of many people’s experiences. They listen to, or read, end￾less verbiage that says little. It takes time, energy, and, as my manager 
insisted, goodwill to encourage people to express themselves in listener- and 
reader-friendly ways. Often entire teams and organizations will tolerate the 
wordiness and vagueness in the belief that it’s mostly accurate. This is a 
dangerous assumption, as wordiness and vagueness can often hide gaps, 
flaws, and misconduct.
Even if this is not so, wordiness and vagueness hide important informa￾tion. Remember Spicer’s comment about executive attention being a scarce 
resource.21 People often feel inclined to over-write to impress senior manag￾ers, to justify their existence, or to anticipate all questions. The result is usu￾ally counterproductive, with the recipients losing both patience and 
confidence. Jane Bettany describes the vicious circle perfectly:
When staff feel disempowered or low in confidence they tend to try to 
write more to demonstrate their worth and how hard they have been 
working rather than understanding the need to be succinct and focus on 
what you need from the person you are communicating to. The message 
can be lost that way.
Executives and senior decision-makers receive hundreds of pages of report￾ing regularly – a direct result of their colleagues’ compulsion to over-write. 
The risks from this kind of excessive yet usually vacuous reporting are 
numerous. It’s clearly inefficient, as Molly Young has pointed out: “No mat￾ter where I’ve worked, it has always been obvious that if everyone agreed to 
use language in the way that it is normally used, which is to communicate, 
the workday would be two hours shorter.”32 Most people would agree with 
this.
Then there is quality of work. How can senior decision-makers such as 
boards and committees make any decisions if they’re relying on hundreds of 
pages of impenetrable verbiage to inform them? It’s simply not reasonable 
to expect this even of well-rested, highly focused people. Their attention 
spans will wander; they will become distracted by true but irrelevant detail; Clarity: the theory 55
they will spot irritating typos, almost inevitable when a reporting team is 
producing too many words in too little time. The result is almost certain to 
be a vague impression that things are generally OK, with a few exceptions 
that (everyone hopes) are under control. After all, what does “issues around 
resource” mean? If you are seeing this as one of countless vague phrases 
across 400 pages, it’s unlikely you will have the time, energy, or concentra￾tion to question one instance of unclear writing, let alone thousands.
In the years following the financial crisis, many people rightly criticized 
the chief executives and chairmen of banks involved. André Spicer refers to 
how often those questioned by government committees claimed they 
couldn’t remember or didn’t know about seemingly important topics.33 On 
the one hand, I have some sympathy. I’ve reviewed 400-page packs of reports 
for bank boards and despaired, while trying to stave off the looming 
migraine prompted by such a mass of meaninglessness.
But I’ve also wondered how things could get to that point. CEOs may 
speak plainly and encourage it, but if the message gets lost further down, the 
reports will reflect this. Without emphasizing the need for concise, clear, 
plain language, the problem will continue and risk overwhelming even those 
at the top.
THE ETHICS OF CLEAR COMMUNICATION
“When possible, refer all matters to committees, for ‘further study and 
consideration’.”
“Bring up irrelevant issues as frequently as possible.”
“Give lengthy and incomprehensible explanations when questioned.”
You may think these instructions are from a tongue-in-cheek guide for 
new managers in your, or any, organization. Actually, they come from a 
document entitled “Simple Sabotage Field Manual,” created by the Office 
of Strategic Services (OSS, the precursor to the CIA) in 1944.34 How can 
instructions designed to undermine enemy forces have so much in com￾mon with many organizations’ everyday habits? They clearly use humans’ 
ability to complicate, confuse, and generally obstruct normal activity, but 
to different ends. In the case of the Field Manual, it’s to win a war; in 
organizations, it’s… what?
This chapter has discussed how people may unwittingly complicate lan￾guage through habit, tiredness, or pressure to appear “managerial.” It has 
also raised the fact that people in organizations may deliberately manipulate 
language to hide misconduct or evade responsibility.
This is why language has an ethical component – words matter. We know 
they can hurt feelings and even commit crimes. Issuing death threats is an 
illegal activity, yet relies solely on words. When organizations or govern￾ment bodies talk about transparency, they are seeking to reassure the public 
of their trustworthiness. References to clear or plain language abound, to 56 Radical Reporting
prove this commitment to transparency. What’s more, the House of 
Commons’ Public Administration Select Committee in the UK
conclude that bad official language which results in tangible harm—such 
as preventing someone from receiving the benefits or services to which 
they are entitled—should be regarded as “maladministration”. People 
should feel able to complain about cases of confusing or misleading 
language, as they would for any other type of poor administration.35
The US Government introduced its Plain Writing Act in 2010, and New 
Zealand a Plain Language Act in 2022. These are of course not the only 
countries to do so, and yet others feature plain-language versions of certain 
pages on their government websites. (Why all the pages of the government 
websites aren’t in plain language by default is a valid question.) 
It is not only public-sector-related bodies that may mandate plain lan￾guage. After all, if plain language increases accessibility and understanding, 
why wouldn’t every organization use it? Some, however, have to be forced 
to do so – in this case, by the regulator. As Bill Birchard points out,
For many years, economists believed financial markets operated ‘effi￾ciently,’ incorporating all available information. The research sug￾gests otherwise. Markets incorporate all accessible information. No 
wonder that, in 1998, the US Securities and Exchange Commission 
mandated that companies use ‘plain English’ in reports to investors. 
The agency even published a 77-page handbook detailing time-tested 
tips – cut extra words, use active voice, speak with personal pronouns 
(e.g., you, your, yours), use common words for jargon, craft short sen￾tences, keep subject, verb, and object together, and more.36
Many jurisdictions require clarity and transparency in consumer contracts, 
government documents, and other official forms. Enforcing it, however, 
is onerous, and it often falls to a consumer to complain that a merchant 
has unclear terms and conditions, for instance, violating the UK Consumer 
Rights Act 2015. Public bodies may say that they believe in plain language, 
transparency, and fairness, but do their actions bear this out? Consider 
the regulatory notice quoted earlier in this chapter; look up some of the 
guidance available in different countries on how to apply for visas or work 
permits. Given that many people relying on this guidance may not speak 
the language fluently, it’s even more crucial that it be accurate, clear, and 
simple.
Rachel Browne, Audit Director at Audit Scotland, notes that “there’s also 
consciousness that good governance is linked to openness and transpar￾ency. Internal communication in public bodies is often much more open 
than communication with the public.” How well public bodies Clarity: the theory 57
communicate can directly affect public trust. A government – or organiza￾tion – that uses unclear language either doesn’t realize it’s failing to meet 
people’s needs, or doesn’t care. Neither situation will build, let alone main￾tain trust.
What is worse is when organizations unwittingly introduce terms that 
reveal a purely transactional view of people. We all know that private-sector 
companies seek a profit – they wouldn’t survive otherwise. However, it is 
reasonable in most countries to expect a modicum of care for employees, 
customers, and communities.
What would you think of a company that refers to staff as “units of 
human capital” that are “terminated” when their careers in the company 
come to an end? I’ve seen this in a Big Four accountancy firm, a global bank, 
and a global manufacturer – no one can claim such clinical, even chilling 
language is sector-specific.
One company, writing about a project achieving its stated objective, 
claimed to have produced “the final solution.” I had to explain that this term 
has a specific and horrifying meaning: the Nazis’ plan to exterminate Jews. 
When I pointed this out to the company’s employees, they were appalled – 
they immediately recognized the reference and how utterly unsuited it was 
to any context other than the historical. Yet someone, somewhere in this 
company had suddenly thought that in its polysyllabic finery, this term was 
a superior version of the old-fashioned, perfectly clear “stated objective.” 
Others, hearing “final solution” in meetings, didn’t question or contradict its 
use – they parroted it. This tone-deafness that so often leads to mere irrita￾tion in this case led an entire team to use Holocaust-specific terminology in 
an update to the board.
Words. Have. Meaning. When we lose sight of this, we not only risk 
confusing or even alienating readers; we risk our own ability to reason. 
Orwell made a compelling point about the habit of using a reduced, cli￾chéd vocabulary, the kind so common in most corporate settings. “But if 
thought corrupts language, language can also corrupt thought. A bad 
usage can spread by tradition and imitation, even among people who 
should and do know better.”37 It’s easier to mimic others’ phrasing, think￾ing it cements our place in the team. However, it also saves us the trouble 
of thinking.
Then when we then do try to think independently, we find ourselves fall￾ing back on the limited, shopworn babble that passes for expression in 
many workplaces. Without exercising the mental muscle of our vocabu￾lary, we end up leaning on verbal crutches either meaningless or unsuited 
to the task. Without an array of varied, nuanced terms to describe situa￾tions and propose responses, we cannot think rigorously or critically about 
anything. We will end up like the poor manager who couldn’t express 
himself other than with “leveraged blue-sky thinking going forward on an 
ongoing basis to benchmark continuous improvement in a world-class 58 Radical Reporting
operational environment.” It took him a great deal of effort and discom￾fort to break the habit that had affected not only his communication but 
also his own ability to reason.
Those using unclear language don’t only stultify themselves and bore 
their listeners; they spread the rot. As Molly Young writes, “The problem 
with these words isn’t only their floating capacity to enrage but their con￾taminating quality. Once you hear a word, it’s ‘in’ you. It has penetrated 
your ears and entered your brain, from which it can’t be selectively 
removed.”38
The next chapter will discuss in detail the hallmarks of unclear language 
in English and how to avoid them. It will use specific, report-related exam￾ples and encourage you to improve them. However, in order to benefit, you 
have to commit to the theory of clarity as well as the practice. The language 
we use is an ethical choice. Choose your words not only to achieve an opera￾tional end, but also to express a commitment to clarity and therefore trans￾parency. If you do this, you will be truly radical!
ACTIVITIES
• How well do you think your organization communicates?
• What guidance or examples have you received on how to communicate? 
This can include official guidelines from the communications team, indi￾vidual team standards, or even the tone expressed by the CEO in regular 
emails or intranet messages.
• What works well in your organization’s communication and what doesn’t?
• Look at the good and bad practices you’ve identified: what comes from 
“tone at the top,” and what comes from habit?
• Does your organization use inclusive language? If not, what message do 
you think this sends to colleagues and clients?
• Have you tried to share, improve, or even create tools and techniques to 
communicate better within your organization? These can include checklists, 
examples in templates, or even discussing the topic during team meetings.
• Select two pieces of writing from your organization: one you feel com￾municates clearly, and one you feel doesn’t. Make notes about how each 
makes you feel, and what you think contributes to that. It can be struc￾ture, language, or even presentation. You can then check your responses 
and develop them after reading the following chapters.Clarity: the theory 59
SUMMARY
• Writing in a clear style affects how well readers understand and then act 
on what they read. As a result, it affects how well organizations perform. 
This isn’t solely about share price and other financial measures – it’s also 
about the values underpinning the organization.
• It is hard to write clearly. Therefore, it’s understandable that people 
often fail to, even when their job is to, produce meaningful reports for 
senior decision-makers. Habit and tiredness play a part; when people 
are under pressure and lack energy, they are likelier to reach for “safe,” 
commonplace corporate expressions, even if these are vague or actively 
misleading.
• Ego and fear also play their part in this human drama. The larger the 
organization, the more hierarchical the culture, and the greater the 
opportunity and temptation to aspire for senior roles. Many people feel 
that to reach these positions, they have to “talk the talk.”
• However, senior decision-makers, including the board, rely on reporting 
to inform and even guide them. If reporting is plagued by wordiness, 
woolliness, and evasive language, they cannot do so.
• Words have meaning; they can help or harm. How we express ourselves 
at work isn’t merely an operational choice, but an ethical one.
NOTES
1 Orwell, “Politics,” 110.
2 Ibid., 105.
3 Grant, Adam. Think Again: The Power of Knowing What You Don’t Know. 
London: Penguin Random House UK, 2021, 4. See also: Stephen E. Toulmin, 
The Uses of Argument (updated first edition) (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2003) and Jonathan Haber, Critical Thinking (Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press, 2020).
4 Bryan A. Garner, Quack This Way: David Foster Wallace and Bryan A. Garner 
Talk Language and Writing (Dallas: RosePen Books, 2013), 50.
5 Orwell, “Politics,” 112.
6 Bill Birchard, Writing for Impact: 8 Secrets from Science That Will Fire Up Your 
Readers’ Brains (Harper Collins Leadership, 2023), 22.
7 Todd Rogers and Jessica Lasky-Fink, Writing for Busy Readers: Communicate 
More Effectively in the Real World (London: Scribe 2023), 31.
8 Ibid.
9 Heffernan, Wilful Blindness, 47.60 Radical Reporting
10 Orwell, “Politics,” 113.
11 United States of America Department of the Treasury Office of the Comptroller 
of the Currency, Report and Recommendation – Executive Summary Russ 
Anderson, Julian, McLinko (occ.gov), 73.
12 Srinvisavan Ragothaman, Tyler Custis, and Melissa Christianson, “Fake 
Accounts Scandal at Wells Fargo: What are the Lessons?,” Journal of Forensic 
and Investigative Accounting, 14:2 (July–December 2022), 315. http://web.
nacva.com/JFIA/Issues/JFIA-2022-No2-11.pdf
13 Spicer, Business Bullshit, 13.
14 Orwell, “Politics,” 116.
15 BP, Deepwater Horizon Accident Investigation Report, September 8, 2010, www.
bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/sustainability/
issue-briefings/deepwater-horizon-accident-investigation-report-executive-sum￾mary.pdf
16 Clarity Writing Experts, 2003.
17 See Simon Caulkin’s explanation of the team’s work in “Oh please, speak 
English,” The Observer, August 24, 2003, www.theguardian.com/business/2003/
aug/24/theobserver.observerbusiness18
18 Berkshire Hathaway Inc., 2012 Annual Report, 3–4, www.berkshirehathaway.
com/2012ar/2012ar.pdf
19 The Big Short (London: Penguin, 2011).
20 Antony Reuben, “HBOS risk control ‘dumbed down’,” BBC News, February 17, 
2008, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/7892079.stm
21 Spicer, Business Bullshit, 21–26, 134–41.
22 “G. M. Internal Investigation Report,” New York Times, June 5, 2014, www.
nytimes.com/interactive/2014/06/05/business/06gm-report-doc.html, 253–54.
23 House of Commons Treasury Committee, Fixing LIBOR: some preliminary find￾ings. Second Report of Session 2012–13. Volume I: Report, together with formal 
minutes. Volume II: Oral evidence. (London: The Stationery Office Limited, 2012), 
65, publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmtreasy/481/481.pdf
24 Ibid., 68.
25 House of Commons Treasury Committee, Banking crisis: Regulation and super￾vision. Fourteenth Report of Session 2008–09 Report, together with formal min￾utes, oral and written evidence (London: The Stationery Office Limited, 2009), 3, 
https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmselect/cmtreasy/767/767.pdf
26 Financial Conduct Authority, Decision notice: Standard Chartered Bank, 
February 5, 2019, 1, www.fca.org.uk/publication/decision-notices/stand￾ard-chartered-bank-2019.pdf
27 Enron, Annual Report 2000, https://picker.uchicago.edu/Enron/EnronAnnual￾Report2000.pdf
28 Completely counterproductive, as demonstrated by Daniel M. Oppenheimer’s 
wittily titled “Consequences of Erudite Vernacular Utilized Irrespective of 
Necessity: Problems with Using Long Words Needlessly,” Applied Cognitive 
Psychology 20 (2006): 139–156, onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/acp.1178
(Yes, the title is a joke – well, at least the part before the colon is.)
29 Birchard, 21.
30 Spicer, Business Bullshit, 11.
31 Spicer, Business Bullshit, 133.Clarity: the theory 61
32 “Garbage language: Why do corporations speak the way they do?,” New York: 
Vulture, February 20, 2020, www.vulture.com/2020/02/spread-of-corporate￾speak.html
33 Spicer, Business Bullshit, 45.
34 Office of Strategic Services (Washington, DC, 1944), 20, 23.
35 Bad Language: The Use and Abuse of Official Language: First Report of Session 
2009–10 (London: 2009), 3, https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200910/
cmselect/cmpubadm/17/1702.htm
36 Birchard, 29–30.
37 Orwell, “Politics,” 116.
38 Young, “Garbage language.”Part 2
Words on the pageDOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-6 65
Chapter 4
Clarity
The practice
The previous three chapters have made a strong case for the importance 
of thinking hard about what you want to say, to whom, and why. Three 
chapters may seem a lot, but it’s impossible to overstate the importance 
of understanding both yourself and your audience. Whether you call this 
topic critical thinking, analytical thinking, or something else, it’s essential 
to writing. In fact, chief audit executives “indicate that analytical/criti￾cal thinking and communication skills are the most important” for their 
teams.1 They won’t be the only ones thinking this. Whichever sector, organ￾ization, or activity you work in, reporting requires rigorous thinking and 
clear communication.
But what is critical thinking? At its simplest, it is “[t]he objective anal￾ysis and evaluation of an issue in order to form a judgement” (Oxford 
Dictionaries), while the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy defines it as 
“careful thinking directed to a goal.” This may seem obvious, and many 
of us assume we do it every day at work. Yet assumption itself is a bar￾rier to reasoning. Moreover, not all regions and cultures approach criti￾cal thinking in the same way. Depending on the country and its traditions, 
which affect educational practice, people may learn real-world applications 
through active learning, or a top-down, collective approach that prioritizes 
rote learning. Yet others feature curriculum content about critical thinking 
influenced by geopolitical views.2
This chapter will help you take the next step, putting words on paper (or 
screen). It will cover the basics – which I call the ABCs – as well as hin￾drances and aids to good, clear writing. These will include references to 
professional bodies and not-for-profit organizations offering resources and 
advice to their members and the public.
The previous chapters talked about two crucial influences on writing: cul￾tural communication styles, and habit. Since these are learned and become 
entrenched over time, it is crucial for us to reacquaint ourselves with the 
principles of critical thinking and common barriers to reasoning. In the 
abstract to an insightful article entitled, “Teaching logic to auditing stu￾dents: can training in logic reduce judgment errors?,” Irvin T. Nelson, 
Richard L. Ratliff, Gordon Steinhoff and Graeme J. Mitchell state that,66 Radical Reporting
Students in this study were taught formal and informal logic in an audit￾ing course. They studied valid and invalid argument forms within the spe￾cific context of auditing services. These students, others without training, 
and a sample of professional auditors were then tested with a series of 
real-world auditing vignettes requiring critical reasoning and judgment. 
Students trained in logic outperformed students without such training. 
Furthermore, students trained in logic outperformed experienced audi￾tors in their abilities to discern valid versus invalid argument forms. 
Conversely, experienced auditors outperformed trained students in their 
abilities to discern believable versus less believable argument premises.3
You may see yourself as experienced in your field, with a sense for faulty 
logic and gaps in evidence. However, all of us, no matter how intelligent or 
experienced, are human. We are just as liable to fall into comfortable pat￾terns and use the reasoning that comes most easily to us. Often, we may be 
right – but are we at risk of missing crucial points that could lead us to dif￾ferent conclusions?
It’s always worth refreshing our understanding of principal modes of 
(European) reasoning. The three examples below should seem familiar to 
you – but do you perhaps favor one when others would be more 
appropriate?
• Deductive reasoning uses verifiable facts to arrive at incontestable 
conclusions. “Everyone who works in this office is an auditor. Elvis 
works in this office. Therefore, Elvis is an auditor.” So, if you know 
for a fact that all customer data is held in a specific database, you can 
state with certainty that if there is a flaw in customer data, you can 
direct your attention to that single database.
• Inductive reasoning strives for probable rather than certain results. 
However, those probable results are nevertheless based on sound, 
precise and verifiable statistics. “Ninety-five per cent of people who 
work in this office are auditors. Elvis works in this office. Therefore, 
Elvis is probably an auditor.” Many of us in assurance functions rea￾son in this way – absolute certainties are few, and we need to focus 
on the likeliest conclusion. However, be aware of this – and avoid 
making global statements such as “This system affects all customers” 
when you have evidence for only 90%.
• Abductive reasoning: “is a method of reasoning in which one chooses 
the hypothesis that would, if true, best explain the relevant evidence. 
Abductive reasoning starts from a set of accepted facts and infers 
their most likely, or best, explanations.” (Wikipedia) “Elvis is most 
likely an auditor. He works in an office full of auditors, and enjoys 
making lists and organizing his office supplies.” 
I have personally seen many people in audit and risk functions rely on this 
last form of reasoning to speculate – based on extensive experience and Clarity: the practice 67
common sense – about the root cause of a particular problem. “It’s under￾staffing after the most recent cuts,” they’ll say, or “Staff haven’t had the 
training yet.” These are both plausible explanations – but in themselves 
aren’t sufficient until you have sought both confirming and disconfirming 
evidence. 
Without objective evidence, you may think you are being rational, with￾out awareness of barriers to reasoning. Are you assuming something? Has 
precedent led to a bias or settled belief (“You always find these problems in 
HR.”)? Have you mistaken correlation for causation? After all, staff may 
not have received training when they should, and you found problems 
shortly afterwards. This doesn’t necessarily mean the two are linked – maybe 
the problems have arisen from a systems error, or the training itself is flawed 
and staff are better off not receiving it!
Adam Grant, in Think Again, emphasizes the importance of being aware 
of the gaps and flaws in our own thinking. 
In psychology, there are at least two biases that drive this pattern. One 
is confirmation bias: seeing what we expect to see. The other is desira￾bility bias: seeing what we want to see. These biases don’t just prevent 
us from applying our intelligence. They can actually contort our intel￾ligence into a weapon against the truth. We find reasons to preach our 
faith more deeply, prosecute our case more passionately, and ride the 
tidal wave of our political party. The tragedy is that we’re usually una￾ware of the resulting flaws in our thinking.4
Just as we want to communicate to people problems in their policies, 
procedures, and systems so they can fix them, we need to understand our 
own mental glitches and shortcuts. To write clearly, we must think clearly. 
And part of this surely includes asking ourselves, “What if I’m wrong?”
As with thinking, writing requires time and discipline. This eventually 
becomes easier with practice, as does any activity. If you regularly drive a 
car, cook food from scratch, or craft items from wood, over time you become 
more proficient and confident, able to perform competently in less time. This 
will happen with writing, too – provided you practice daily. If you apply the 
techniques in this book, and particularly this chapter, to everything you 
write, you will quickly discover three benefits. First, you will gain technical 
fluency – that is, the practice of plain language will become second nature, 
coming quickly and more easily as time passes. This in turn means you will 
produce clear writing more confidently and efficiently. Finally, it will make 
it easier for you to compile a report, as you pull together the components 
you have already written well.
To produce good reports, as with all writing, requires a relentless focus on 
using the fewest, best words, no matter the medium. It sounds easy, but it’s 
not, and the best writers are those who take the effort to make their work 
readable. Again – hard writing makes easy reading, as exemplified in the 68 Radical Reporting
famous quote attributed to everyone from La Rochefoucauld to Churchill: 
“I’m sorry to have sent you such a long letter; I didn’t have time to write a 
shorter one.”
Conveying complex information is hard; conveying it clearly and con￾cisely is even harder. It’s not impossible, of course – consider writer and 
broadcaster Jim Al-Khalili, professor of theoretical physics and chair in the 
public engagement in science at the University of Surrey. He communicates 
some of the most difficult scientific topics – quantum physics, for instance – 
in clear, reader-friendly prose. Whether in a book or a television program, 
the language he uses is not complex or flowery, because he knows readers 
will be focusing all their attention on the concepts he is explaining. He there￾fore chooses simple, elegant, transparent language that allows the reader to 
concentrate fully on the content.
This takes us back to the “fear” element discussed earlier; many people 
think that if they use simple language, it undermines the complexity or 
gravity of what they’re saying. But the opposite is true: the clearer and sim￾pler the language, the more easily your readers or listeners will understand 
your message. The aim is to deliver a message using the fewest, best words, 
so that the broadest relevant audience will understand it quickly and 
easily.
How do we achieve clear, simple language, especially when conveying dif￾ficult or complex messages? To make writing effective and efficient, we must 
focus on the essentials.
THE ABCs
These ABCs aren’t the alphabet we all learn in our earliest school years, 
wherever we are. In this instance, they are the three crucial attributes of 
plain language in English: being active, brief, and concrete. I’ve referred 
to these as the ABCs for several years now.5 It speaks to people’s forma￾tive experiences of language learning while providing a handy three-letter 
acronym (beloved of most organizations). Most important, it helps all writ￾ers in English, whether native or non-native speakers, to avoid pitfalls and 
enhance their messages.
Active
By “active,” we simply mean preferring active voice to passive voice in 
English. Other languages have greater linguistic and cultural tolerance of 
the passive voice; however, in English, overusing it can harm writing.
But what do we mean by “active” and “passive”? You can easily find 
explanations of varying degrees of accuracy and clarity, but it’s best to 
focus on sentence structure. To put it simply, an active sentence in English 
starts with the doer – the person or thing performing an action. The action Clarity: the practice 69
follows, and then the done-to (the person or thing on the receiving end of 
the action).6
Example: The manager reviewed the report.
Analysis: The manager (doer) reviewed (action) the report (done-to).
In a passive sentence, you simply switch the order around and move the 
done-to to the front of the sentence.
Example: The report was reviewed by the manager.
One important point is that we are talking about voice, not tense, here. 
Many people wrongly refer to the “active tense” and the “passive tense,” 
which in grammatical terms makes about as much sense as referring to “sky 
biscuits” or “cat feathers.” Tense is to do with when something happens – 
hence past, present, future, and many other tenses.
This means you can have active and passive voices in any tense. The 
example above was in past tense. Putting the same message into present and 
future tenses gives you the following:
The manager reviews the report. (present tense, active voice)
The report is reviewed by the manager. (present tense, passive voice)
The manager will review the report. (future tense, active voice)
The report will be reviewed by the manager. (future tense, passive voice)
Let’s go back to the “The report was reviewed by the manager.” In many 
cases, you’ll see (or write) passive sentences that completely omit the doer. 
“The report was reviewed.” This is perfectly fine, grammatically. However, 
if you get into the habit of writing in the passive voice, you will inevitably 
produce sentences without doers – and therefore entire documents with few 
clear authors or causes of the actions you describe. This will quickly become 
untenable.
Why?
It will become untenable for two reasons: first, it’s harder for the reader 
to untangle what’s happening. Second, if your writing obscures important 
information such as the doer, or cause, or origin, it may seem evasive. In 
English-speaking countries, for example, a favored expression of politicians 
or organizations hit by scandal – “Mistakes were made” – has become a 
joke. However, those hit by scandal haven’t learned to be more transparent; 
they’ve compounded their folly by adding “and lessons will be learned.” No 
one says who made the mistakes or who will learn the lessons. As a result, 
such phrases have become a hallmark of irresponsible, untrustworthy peo￾ple and organizations – and note, these phrases rely on the passive voice. 
This is doubtless why George Orwell advised, “Never use the passive where 
you can use the active.”770 Radical Reporting
Now, Orwell’s advice is a bit extreme – “never” statements usually are. 
Rupert Morris, who provided the useful Clarity Index shown in Chapter 3, 
once told me that 80–85% of writing (in English) should be in the active 
voice. From decades of working as a professional writer and editor, and 
reading thousands of reports, I agree. Once your use of active voice drops 
below that threshold, you risk confusing or alienating your readers.
This means that up to 20% of your writing can be in the passive voice, 
and there can be many excellent reasons to use it. However, “Because every￾one else uses it,” “Because I don’t actually know who is doing this,” and 
“Because I’m in the habit of it” are not among them. It doesn’t mean these 
reactions aren’t common – they are. There’s also the fact that many audit 
and risk professionals shy away from using the active voice because they 
equate it with blaming individuals. As Marisa Melliou, Group Audit 
Director, OPAP s.a., rightly says, “Putting the blame on a specific person 
does not usually help to communicate our findings and collaborate with 
business to find proper solutions.”
She’s dead right – yet how often would you indicate a specific person, by 
name? I have now read well over 3,500 audit, risk, compliance, and cyber￾security reports. Few mention individuals, and then only by role: the chief 
financial officer, for instance, or the division manager. These people are usu￾ally highly paid to manage their respective areas, and while we shouldn’t 
personalize observations, there is nothing wrong with saying that the person 
in charge has not fulfilled his or her role.
Most reports will refer to a team, an area, a department, or a division, so 
any observations can state that “the team” or “senior managers,” not named 
individuals. After all, readers know that the report is about operations in a 
particular area, or a certain team, so why would the writer suddenly become 
coy about it?
People are often too ready to accept passive voice because they say they 
don’t want to upset anyone and derail relations with the client or business. 
This is understandable – as the previous chapters have made clear, conflict is 
something most of us avoid, and entire cultures develop ways to manage it.
It can go too far, though. I recently saw someone who advises internal 
audit teams saying that active voice can sound like blame, or be too harsh. 
This seems to me at best overly cautious, doing anything to avoid disagree￾ment. At worst, it encourages people to think that avoiding difficult conver￾sations is acceptable.
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the Global Internal Audit Standards, pub￾lished in January 2024, lead with Standard 1.1: Honesty and Professional 
Courage. In an article on how the active voice promotes action, Richard 
Chambers and I pointed out that, 
We’re not saying this is easy — simply essential. Internal auditors must 
be courageous when serving their organizations. Courage isn’t just lim￾ited to “pushing against closed doors,” or “sailing toward the storms.” Clarity: the practice 71
We must also be courageous to tell it like it is when our work is done. 
Writing in the active voice often requires courage. But more impor￾tantly, it is often the call to action that our clients need to hear.8 
Taking the easy option of using passive voice is understandable, but risky 
and potentially unethical. Overusing the passive is the perfect way to obscure 
any gaps or assumptions in your own fieldwork or research, as well as to 
hinder the organization in actually understanding and addressing problems. 
This is exactly why the passive voice is the go-to structure for anyone who 
wants to dodge responsibility.
It’s hard to break the corporate habit of relying on passive. Try turning it 
into a game. One of my favorite ways of spotting a passive sentence is to add 
the words “by zombies” to the end of it. “The report was reviewed by zom￾bies.”9 Have a go yourself!
When would you sensibly use the passive? You could use it if the doer 
isn’t important. If, for example, all that matters is that the report be reviewed, 
then say, “The report will be reviewed.” It could be clear from the context. 
If you say, “The manager reviews all reports. This one will be reviewed next 
week,” then we know the manager will be doing the reviewing.
There could be legal reasons for using the passive – hence “Mistakes were 
made,” where a company’s legal counsel has probably strictly advised 
against saying, “We made mistakes.” Then again, it could be that the writer 
doesn’t know exactly who did something: “The firewall was breached at 
10:37:26 on 25 May 2020.” If the writer is updating senior managers about 
an investigation, it may be that this is all they can say at the time – they’re 
still investigating the source of the breach (the doer).
So, there are several good reasons to use the passive voice. Habit, incom￾plete research, or fear of stating facts aren’t among them.
There are even better reasons to use the active voice. If you are writing 
reports, you will be conveying information you have gathered yourself, or 
which other people have sent to you. In both cases, understanding the dif￾ference between active and passive voice can help you do your work better. 
Let’s look at two examples, both taken from real (but anonymous) cases.
The first is from an IT report. In this report, the writers stated that “The 
IT Services Team does not adhere to Control A. Controls B and C are not 
adhered to, either.”
This seemed clear on first reading: it was the IT Services Team that did not 
adhere to Controls B and C. Reading further, however, I became confused. I 
had thought one team alone was responsible for not complying with three 
different controls; the rest of the report suggested otherwise.
When I questioned the report-writers, they astonished me by saying, “Oh, 
a second team – not previously mentioned – is responsible for Control B. 
And to adhere to Control B, that team relies on a third team performing 
Control C. And no, we hadn’t mentioned that third team before, either.” 72 Radical Reporting
Why not? Well, according to the report-writers, because it was immaterial to 
anything except the recommendation for fixing the problem.
But it’s not immaterial. Whether you’re in audit, risk, compliance, IT secu￾rity, or project management, you need to know where a problem arises and 
where it exists before you can solve it. If you phrase things in the passive, 
without stating the doer, you deprive the reader – and possibly yourself – of 
a clear view of what exactly is going wrong.
In this case, as I explained to the report-writers, you cannot recommend 
ways to fix a problem unless you know what it is. And part of knowing what 
it is consists of knowing exactly who is involved in what activities. So if, as 
I had originally thought, the IT Services Team was responsible for all three 
controls – and was not adhering to any of them – I’d assume the problem 
was within the team: recruitment, training, supervision. If an entire team is 
getting that much wrong, that’s where the problem lies.
However, if – as we discovered in this example – you have three dis￾tinct teams who are all getting the same category of controls wrong, the 
problem may lie elsewhere. Is governance – roles and responsibilities, 
policies and processes, guidance and updates – clear? Are the teams rely￾ing on information from regulators in different jurisdictions, which can 
confuse matters? Are they using different systems, none of which inter￾acts with each other?
Another example – one I’ve seen many times – is overusing the passive in 
a procedures document. Imagine, for instance, someone has just joined a 
customer services team and is studying the procedures manual. The manual 
may well include instructions such as these:
• When a customer communication is received, it is scanned into the 
workflow system.
• The communication is then assigned a case number and case handler.
• Requests are sent for briefings.
• Once the briefings are completed and returned, they are scanned into 
the workflow system.
• An investigative report is then drafted.
• Once the report has been accepted as being factually correct, a response 
to the customer is then drafted.
• The response is reviewed, amended as necessary, signed, and sent.
• The file is then updated and, if no further action is required, the case 
is closed on the workflow system.
I count 17 actions (in bold font) among these eight bullet points. Although 
this text isn’t verbatim, I’ve based it on customer complaint-handling pro￾cesses I’ve seen in different organizations. This kind of writing isn’t unusual. 
So, what’s the problem?
The problem is two-fold: first, for the poor new staff member joining the 
customer services team. How is this person supposed to know who does Clarity: the practice 73
what? At no point is there a team name or job title to say exactly which 
actions belong to whom. In this situation, people will make mistakes – I’ve 
seen it happen. If they don’t make mistakes, it’s because they constantly check 
and double-check with colleagues and managers who exactly is responsible 
for what when. And that is a huge waste of time and resources – it’s opera￾tionally inefficient.
The second problem is for people in assurance functions – auditors, risk, 
and compliance professionals – who need to assess such procedures as part 
of their reviews. How can anyone assess the procedure I’ve described above 
as adequate (designed to mitigate risk)? There simply isn’t enough 
information.
The eight bullet points and 17 actions could, for example, be the respon￾sibility of one member of staff alone. That’s dangerous, though – leaving 
aside what happens if that person falls ill, there’s a high risk of fraud or error 
from not segregating tasks and duties. That one person can make complaints 
disappear, or instruct compensation payments into accounts other than the 
customers’. It’s a bad process and a bad control.
At the other extreme, the eight bullet points and 17 actions could be split 
among 12 people in six different teams. That’s so complicated as to be use￾less – confusion is inevitable, as is duplication of effort. Again, a bad process 
and a bad control.
It could, however, be that it’s a well-designed process, sitting within one 
or two teams and just enough people to promote checks and balances. In 
that case, a discussion with the manager should reveal this information. If 
so, suggest that he or she updates the process manual to make matters clear 
to everyone. However, if the manager can’t or won’t explain how the pro￾cess works, take note – you may have some more investigating to do in that 
particular area! And all because the overuse of the passive voice alerted you 
to a potential problem.
It’s easy to look at voice purely in negative terms, focusing solely on 
avoiding the risks posed by the passive voice. A more positive view is that 
using the active voice engages and draws in the reader. According to Louise 
McKay, UK Risk & Compliance Director at Royal London Group in 
Edinburgh, “Always use the active voice in preference to the passive – it 
makes a huge difference to audience engagement.”
Using the active or the passive voice alone can make the difference 
between clarity and confusion, success and failure. This is an important 
point, and one we will develop further in Chapter 7.
Brief
Almost everyone has heard the advice to be brief when writing. Many people 
have approached me during training breaks, or at conferences, and barked 
a famous quote at me to show they agree with this point. Thomas Jefferson 
supposedly said, “The most valuable of all talents is that of never using 74 Radical Reporting
two words when one will do.” I’ve also heard these words attributed to 
Churchill and others. A more modern quote – and more easily attributable 
– comes from novelist Colson Whitehead, who advises writers, “Never use 
three words when one will do. Be concise. Don’t fall in love with the gentle 
trilling of your mellifluous sentences. Learn how to ‘kill your darlings,’ as 
they say.”10
But which darlings do you kill? Which words to cut? And why should you 
even try to do so?
You should be brief because it’s easier to read. If you doubt me, consider 
the last report you struggled to read at work, and look at how long the 
sentences are. Most of them will probably exceed 15–20 words, a sensible 
guide advised by plain-language expert Martin Cutts.11 This rule of thumb 
echoes that of Rupert Morris, who recommended no more than 20% pas￾sive voice – giving us another “rule of 20.” Another way to phrase it is to 
encourage “20/20 vision” in your writing.
Using the active voice alone will help keep your writing brief, as active 
sentences are usually shorter than the passive versions. Consider the exam￾ples of the manager reviewing reports. The only way to make the passive 
sentences shorter would be to omit the doer – and that, as we said, creates 
another set of problems. So, when you “kill your darlings,” start by targeting 
unnecessary passives.
If you don’t keep it brief, through active voice and word choice, you will 
lose your readers. People in most workplaces are tired, distracted, and under 
pressure. A sentence that demands unbroken attention across two, three, 
even four lines is a burden. It’s common for people to say that by the time 
they reached the end of a sentence, they’d forgotten how it started.
This isn’t to say long sentences can’t be readable; they can. However, it 
requires time, attention, and discipline from the writer to produce an impec￾cably constructed and punctuated sentence. In most cases, and especially 
when faced with a deadline, it’s simply easier to cut a long sentence into two 
or three. (As stated earlier, if the writer isn’t in a rush, he or she will proba￾bly be able to craft a shorter sentence to begin with.)
Even if you don’t lose your reader’s attention, you may lose his or her 
respect by using long words and sentences. As Daniel Oppenheimer of 
Princeton University proved, writers who show off are a turn-off.12
This brings us to why people write too much to begin with. In my experi￾ence, there are several reasons, all of which we need to address.
First, time pressure – it’s easier to dash off a vague, rambling sentence 
than a clear, tight one where every word earns its place. It’s like packing a 
suitcase by throwing everything into it and then trying to force it shut; the 
locks will break. Are you rushing and therefore cramming too much into 
your sentence-suitcases? Could you select fewer items, arrange them more 
tidily, and close the lid easily? Yes, but it’s hard to do in a rush.
This is why famous writers have apparently apologized for not having 
enough time to write a short letter. It takes time, effort, and discipline most Clarity: the practice 75
of us don’t feel we have. But if the writer doesn’t take the pains to write 
clearly, the reader will either give up trying to make sense of the writing or 
completely misunderstand it. The risks are clear.
A second reason is that the writer may not fully understand his or her 
own message. This is similar to people clearing their throats or using “Er,” 
“um,” “ah,” “well,” “you know,” and other filler words when they have to 
speak unexpectedly. Writers asked to produce an urgent memo or brief are 
likely to start writing and think while they write. However, unless the 
writer then rigorously reviews and cuts, the resulting memo or brief is 
likelier to convey the writer’s confused thought process than a crystal-clear 
message.
Finally, assumptions, beliefs, and habits often encourage people to write 
more. It may be that people think writing more will make them appear more 
intelligent, informed, educated, and professional. (The Oppenheimer 
research kills this myth.) It could be that they see others in the workplace 
producing long sentences and pages of verbiage, and think they must do so, 
too. It can be daunting and even scary, as we stated earlier, to swim against 
the corporate cultural current.
It often takes an outsider to see the corporate habits that inhibit clear 
writing. A belief that more is more, and that excess will impress, pervades 
many organizations. The investigative journalist Barbara Ehrenreich has 
worked undercover in companies to see how they work from the inside. For 
her book Bait and Switch: The Futile Pursuit of the Corporate Dream, she 
pretended to be a job-seeker. This allowed her to observe firsthand how the 
employment industry – including résumé advisers, personality-test advo￾cates, and HR teams – works. Her insights show how people entering the 
workplace are encouraged to communicate from the start.
The advice she received on her résumé is telling:
Break everything I claim to have done down into its smaller, constituent 
activities, so that, for example, I didn’t just “plan” an event, I “met with 
the board to develop objectives” and went on through the various other 
phases of the job to “facilitate post-event evaluations.” What can I say? 
It certainly fills up space.13
Speaking of filling up space, there is often an even simpler explanation for 
wordiness. In some countries, for example, most people are given minimum 
word counts for their assignments throughout their schooling. In many 
others, the word-count requirement disappears in favor of a page count by 
high school, at the latest.
What this means is that many people have had to continue to meet an 
often arbitrary word count six, eight, ten, or more years after their overseas 
colleagues. In this case, they will have acquired the habit of using words not 
to add specific meaning or nuance, but to hit a certain number of words. This 
habit will continue into the workplace. Instead of writing “now,” people 76 Radical Reporting
conditioned to write more for the sake of it will have written, “at this point 
in time.” “We will do this” easily becomes “We will do this in the future going 
forward on an ongoing basis.” Does any of this sound familiar?
The result will be pages of black marks, there simply to fill the pages with 
black marks. If your school, college, university, or professional body required 
you to hit a word count long after your age reached double digits, you will 
have to unlearn that habit. This conditioning takes years to overcome. It’s 
worth unlearning, though, as your readers will benefit.
Another contributor to wordiness takes us back to culture. Many non￾native speakers of English have two reasons to write more words than neces￾sary. First, they may come from a culture where longer sentences are linguistically 
and culturally acceptable. When working with German clients, for example, I 
adapt Martin Cutts’ 15–20-word guideline for English sentences. This is espe￾cially important because of German compound words, where a single word 
made up of multiple elements can create a wonderfully precise and nuanced 
term. My personal favorite is Rechtsschutzversicherungsgesellschaften, which 
all by itself conveys “insurance companies providing legal protection.” You 
can see, though, how even a short sentence including two or three com￾pound words could ambush the reader.
Other non-native speakers may tend to use longer words and sentences 
almost defensively. All too often I’ve heard people working in the UK, for 
example, say that native English-speakers they work with will automatically 
assume non-native speakers have a poor vocabulary or don’t understand 
grammar. The result, though, is defensive writing, using the longest words 
and most complex sentences to say, “Look – I do know the language, and 
better than you!” It’s a reaction I sympathize with. Having learned several 
languages myself, I’ve always gone through a phase of using literary or 
archaic (OK, pretentious) terms, simply to prove to native speakers that I 
could. I eventually overcame this tendency when native speakers asked me 
to proofread their writing – this showed I no longer had anything to prove.
The journalist Nesrine Malik writes beautifully of how her experience of 
learning, then mastering, English brought with it self-consciousness, prompted 
by (sometimes) well-intentioned criticism from others. Now, she says,
I don’t have time for that kind of preciousness about language any more. 
Having spent so many years trying to “improve” my English, I realised that 
the more I tried to follow norms, be they related to accent, pronunciation 
or even inflection and tone, the more hesitant and overly formal my English 
became. The English I ended up speaking is (as all languages are) dynamic 
and porous to other influences, and all the more expressive for it.14
Whichever language/s we speak, we all need to communicate. Using active, 
brief language will help you do so, without stripping your writing of its 
expressiveness. Earlier in the chapter, we mentioned certain metrics – a max￾imum of 20 words for a sentence in English, and a maximum of 20% pas￾sive voice across a document. You don’t have to count these painstakingly Clarity: the practice 77
yourself – software will do it for you. One of the most commonly available 
is the Microsoft Word readability statistics tool. You do need to config￾ure this ahead of time in Word, so look online for guidance appropriate to 
whichever version of Word you have.
There are two important points: first, you must select “Grammar & Style.” 
(Sometimes this is called “Grammar & Refinements,” which is unnecessarily 
refined.) Second, you must review the entire document using both Spell 
Check and Grammar Check. Yes, it’s tedious; however, when you are on ver￾sion 27, it’s after ten at night, and you’ve become word-blind, it will spot 
mistakes you made unknowingly. I’ve been writing professionally for over 
30 years and still, when tired or distracted, will type “the” twice. I know I do 
it; I know I shouldn’t; yet I do. It’s called being human.
The wondrous thing is that once you have done all this, a text box will 
appear showing various statistics. The two you should focus on are under 
“Words per Sentence” and “Passive Sentences.” If you can get both numbers 
below 20, your text is likelier to be reader-friendly. If not, go through that 
document, cut long sentences, and transform passive to active. You should then 
see the numbers going down, which can be encouraging. Remember, you’re too 
close to the text to judge it objectively – let the software take some of the strain.78 Radical Reporting
One word of warning, though. At the time of writing, newer versions of 
Windows feature Editor, which assesses and scores your writing. Beware the 
overall grade it gives as a percentage – my experience is that this “Editor 
Score” currently returns a lot of false positives. Check instead the readability 
statistics, which Editor should reveal, for your word-per-sentence average 
and percentage of passive.
Other software is available, Hemingway Editor and Grammarly being 
two of the best known at the time of writing. Both have the aim of alerting 
writers to common pitfalls so they can correct the text themselves. After all, 
the writer is usually best placed to respond to a comment such as “could 
replace with a simpler word.” Speaking of simpler words…
Concrete
We’ve discussed the importance of using the active voice 80–85% of the time 
and keeping sentences below 20 words (in English). Toward the end of this 
chapter, I’ll share tools and techniques you can use to achieve these goals.
The last element of the ABCs, though, is as important. It’s being concrete, 
by avoiding vague, abstract language. One way in which writers can do this 
is by being alert to nominalizations, which Bryan A. Garner amusingly calls 
“zombie nouns.”15 Again – zombies to the rescue! What are they, though, 
and why are they a problem?
A nominalization is when you take a verb and make it into a noun. For 
example, “to analyze” is a verb; “analysis” is the nominalization (the noun 
form of the verb). To replace “to analyze” with a nominalization, though, 
requires you to add more words. You will have to say, “to perform an analy￾sis” or “to undertake an analysis” to get the equivalent of “to analyze.”
Garner’s term “zombie noun” works well, as it conveys a lively image. 
Instead of a sleek, lively verb that conveys meaning and prompts action, we see 
instead a zombie: a sluggish, shuffling, stumbling brain-devourer. Martin Cutts 
also has a vivid term for nominalizations: “smothered verbs.”16 As you can see 
from the right-hand column below, the verbs certainly are smothered.
Using a verb Using a zombie noun
analyze perform or undertake an analysis of
implement perform or undertake an implementation of
reconcile perform or undertake a reconciliation of
compare perform, undertake, or make a comparison of
approve provide or grant approval of/to
buy make a purchase of
You see in each case how the version on the right requires more words to 
produce the same meaning as on the left. Why would you do that? You’d be 
wasting words and trying the reader’s patience.Clarity: the practice 79
You won’t be aware you’re doing this, much in the same way you aren’t 
aware of overusing the passive voice. It will probably be a habit picked up 
in the workplace. As with the passive voice, it can create the same vagueness 
and potential confusion. A passive sentence without a doer is unclear about 
the source or cause of an action. In a process description, we saw how the 
passive obscured how many people or teams were involved.
The same can happen with zombie nouns. Some years ago, I saw a local 
government report on public housing. It included this sentence: “Retention 
and completion of all relevant sections of sign up checklists needs to be 
improved to evidence that arrears prevention is discussed with tenants from 
the outset.” The sentence is over 20 words, has two instances of the passive 
voice (“needs to be improved” and “is discussed”), and, unsurprisingly, fea￾tures zombie nouns: retention, completion, prevention.17 It is unclear from 
the sentence who is meant to perform these actions. We can assume that 
someone or a specific team will discuss how tenants can avoid arrears; com￾plete forms about the discussion; and retain them. We can also infer that 
someone needs to do a better job of the second two tasks: completing and 
retaining the checklists. Who is going to improve them isn’t clear, though. Is 
it the same person or team who isn’t doing it well to begin with? People 
higher up? A different part of the organization?
When writing is unclear – when it doesn’t follow the ABCs – it can be 
hard to read, and even harder to critique. Many people complain about 
review processes in the workplace, and it’s true they’re often as ineffective as 
they are inefficient. Chapter 9 will cover the process, the pitfalls, and how to 
make reviewing a useful and positive experience for everyone.
However, think of the poor reviewers. Looking at the sentence above, we 
can see how much time and effort it would take for a reviewer to unpick the 
vagueness, gaps, and assumptions in it. No wonder few people take such 
trouble for every sentence in a 10- or 20-page draft, let alone a 400-page 
board pack. When reports convey important messages for the most senior 
decision-makers, or to the public, the consequences can be severe.
Chapter 3 featured an excerpt from one such document, the official report 
on BP’s Deepwater Horizon accident investigation. It featured an uncharac￾teristically wordy and evasive passage: “Wherever appropriate, the report 
indicates the source or nature of the information on which analysis has been 
based or conclusions have been reached. Where such references would be 
overly repetitive or might otherwise confuse the presentation, evidentiary 
references have been omitted.”18 Let’s analyze this passage using the ABCs. 
Is it as active, brief, and concrete as it could be?
Active: 100% of the sentences in this excerpt (both of them) feature the pas￾sive voice. Passive voice should feature in no more than 20% of the writing.
Brief: The average word count for both sentences is 20.5. This is only just 
above the 15–20-word guideline. It is also repetitive – “references” feature 
twice in a single sentence, ironically one criticizing repetition “would be 
overly repetitive.”80 Radical Reporting
Concrete: The excerpt features zombie nouns in passive constructions – 
“analysis has been based,” “conclusions have been reached.”
I suggested a different version in the last chapter: “This report gives the 
source and nature of information wherever possible. Where we feel evidence 
is repetitive or potentially confusing, we have put it in the appendix.” Zero 
passive voice; 13.5 words per sentence.19 And understood instantly.
More importantly, the active voice and especially the word “we” create a 
relationship with the reader. Rather than pronouncing from a lofty position 
on what the reader can or cannot understand, the rewrite tries to say, “This 
is what we’ve done and why. We hope it’s useful and easy to read.” As Louise 
McKay said, it engages the audience.
Even resources meant to help people communicate more clearly may not 
help. The book Office English, from 1961, aims to accompany new employ￾ees in an office environment as they discover such novelties as tape recorders 
and telegrams. Much of the advice is practical and sound. The preface, how￾ever, says,
The aim of this book is to produce facility and accuracy in expression, 
with particular attention to the use of English in commerce. Exercises 
for increasing the range of vocabulary, extending the scope of sen￾tence-patterns and building substantial and well-arranged paragraphs 
are given. Attention is paid to spelling and to those rules of grammar 
having direct bearing in clarifying correspondence.20
How many instances of the passive voice can you find in this quote, and 
how many zombie nouns? You may think that the date of the book excuses 
such a wordy, pompous style. However, as you’ll see in the resources list at 
the end of this book, several authorities predate Office English by several 
decades. All warn against reader-repellent writing.
As Rogers and Lasky-Fink advise, 
You will rarely go wrong with a modified version of “less is more”: Aim 
for the least amount of complexity that will allow you to engage your 
intended reader. You need to pay attention to context, but remember 
that more readable writing is fundamentally more effective writing.21
Many writers, especially those lacking confidence, may be tempted to use 
large language models (LLMs) at this point. After all, if software such as 
ChatGPT can draft text for you quickly and easily, why master the discipline 
of plain language?
For those in assurance functions, it seems natural to use the available 
technology to speed up the process. As Alee Marschke says, “Brainstorming, 
critical thinking, and writing are key requirements for an internal audit. 
These skills blend smoothly with the capabilities of AI Large Language 
Models (LLMs), making internal auditing a viable space to incorporate AI 
tools into everyday work.”22Clarity: the practice 81
Many people feel nervous about new technology, and LLMs are no differ￾ent. Software such as ChatGPT evolves constantly, using prompts and text 
fed to it, to improve its performance. As it improves in response to human 
input, though, its outputs may become – to some people – worryingly 
human-like. As Marschke states, 
For some, a tool based on human knowledge may lead to more natural, 
intuitive interactions that allow for a more efficient exchange of infor￾mation. For others, the blurred line between AI and human interaction 
may increase fears of the inability to distinguish between the two or add 
to worries regarding the sentience of AI.23
Lorelei Lingard writes about writing, specifically in medical education. In 
an illuminating article, she tested ChatGPT to see its uses and pitfalls, and 
experienced first hand what she perceived as its human-like aspects: “I know 
it isn’t sentient and doesn’t have motivations or emotions, but I can’t help 
but think in some of our exchanges that it was being sullen, intractable, even 
deliberately insincere.”24
Yet people with backgrounds in accountancy or IT, for instance, may feel 
that writing skills are not their forte – numbers and coding are. However, 
everyone can improve their writing skills, and we cannot outsource or abdi￾cate responsibility for clear communication. As with any technology – type￾writers, word processors, smartphones, or LLMs – human beings must take 
the lead in prompting and checking any text produced. After all, even if you 
use a traditional typewriter, you must think about what you are typing and 
check for manual errors afterward. 
If you choose to use LLMs, think about what you include in prompts. 
First, plain language – and the critical thinking that should precede 
and accompany it – is crucial to creating prompts likely to produce 
relevant text. According to Alexander Rühle, CEO and Co-Founder of 
Zapliance, 
generic prompts equal generic output; not usable for assurance but for 
brainstorming purposes. Specific prompts are necessary. To get to work￾ing prompts, shifting mindsets and retraining are necessary. Writing 
regularly is a process to derive a logically complete text. When prompt￾ing, you need to know beforehand the characteristics of the output.
Equally important is the content of your prompts. As IIA Global has 
stated, “internal auditors should not include any proprietary information 
about their organization in their prompts. Remember: ChatGPT stores 
everything that is typed into it.”25
Further consequences of LLMs’ use of input have appeared. Following 
the New York Times’ lawsuit against OpenAI and Microsoft for copyright 
infringement in December 2023, eight US newspapers followed suit in April 
2024.26 Entering data into LLMs may generate useful text speedily – but it 82 Radical Reporting
can lead to legal and reputational harm, as can using LLMs without attribu￾tion when producing text.
A third point is that while LLMs may produce useful text, they may also 
produce nonsense. As Lorelei Lingard states, 
ChatGPT is a text generator, not a brain: it is putting together words 
that are likely to be found together around the topic you’ve asked about. 
That doesn’t mean these words ‘belong’ together or that they are ‘true’. 
In fact, ChatGPT seems to enjoy making sh*t up. You absolutely cannot 
trust the references it gives you.27
OTHER HINDRANCES TO CLEAR WRITING
Personal hang-ups
We’ve been reading words since the start of this book, and I’ve shown how 
to put the ABCs – words – into practice. So, what else do we need to say 
about them here?
Everything.
Words are emotive, and not only ones that indicate anger, contempt, criti￾cism, and the like. How we use words, pronounce them, and spell them says 
a great deal about us. Most people can immediately think of national or 
regional assumptions. Many cultures associate accents, dialects, and slang 
negatively with the speaker’s education and even intelligence. Understanding 
that a country or language can have different registers makes the difference 
between engaging and alienating people. Words can hinder as well as help, 
and how we react to other people’s use of them often reflects more about 
our own beliefs and insecurities.
Some people like to pretend that language – and words – are irrelevant. I can 
immediately think of two such instances from when I worked in a global bank. 
In each case, the colleague – a native English-speaker – asked me to review a 
draft document for clarity. One document was an email, the other a set of slides. 
Both documents sought to convey important information about projects.
These colleagues never knew each other and didn’t work in the same area. 
What they had in common was the way they asked me to review what they 
had written. Both said exactly the same thing: “Can you have a look at this 
and tell me if it makes sense? But don’t bother about the words or language 
or anything – just the message.”
You can see the lack of logic in this request. My response was to ask them 
how they planned to convey the message, if not through language. Cave 
paintings? Interpretive dance? Mime? What they’d said made no sense, and 
yet it speaks to some underlying truths about people and wording.
When I reflect on it, they asked the same question, but came from differ￾ent perspectives. The first person who asked me came from a scientific back￾ground and proudly asserted that she “wasn’t good at English” (her native Clarity: the practice 83
language). She genuinely didn’t have a problem with errors in spelling, punc￾tuation, grammar, or usage “unless they affect the meaning.” But, because 
she was indifferent to the accuracy of the written word, she wasn’t alert to 
potential problems.
The second person who asked me this was aware of the importance of 
language, but defensive. She spoke with a strong regional accent that some 
colleagues mocked. As a result, she often felt judged for speaking the way 
she did, as so many people couldn’t overcome their prejudices to listen to 
what she said, which was almost always sound. She was an intelligent and 
well-informed colleague, but, because of her experiences, she anticipated 
negative responses to anything she said or wrote.
You may know people like this in your organization. If they’re senior, it 
can be difficult to overcome their habits and assumptions about communi￾cation. However, you have an opportunity to discuss with them how impor￾tant words are, and how to use them judiciously.
What may encourage you is to know that at the most senior levels of orga￾nizations, most people appreciate clear language. Sometimes it comes as a 
relief when a new director sets the standard for plain language. One such is 
David Dart, Head of Allied Command Operations Internal Audit at NATO. “I 
brought with me my own style of formatting and writing audit reports,” he 
says, “and I have adopted this across my team without any complaint.” In 
fact, his team welcomed his approach, especially as it favors plain language: 
“I particularly dislike long sentences and complexity, and, although a degree 
of formality is important, it should not cloud the message.” It is, after all, pos￾sible to be professional and plain – in the best possible way. But all too often, 
people confuse formality with pompousness, aided by corporatespeak.
Corporatespeak (yes, again)
This brings us back to the language discussed in Chapter 3. Molly Young, how￾ever, prefers the term “garbage language,” which is nothing if not emotive! “I 
like Anna Wiener’s term for this kind of talk: garbage language,” she writes.
It’s more descriptive than corporatespeak or buzzwords or jargon. 
Corporatespeak is dated; buzzword is autological, since it is arguably 
an example of what it describes; and jargon conflates stupid usages with 
specialist languages that are actually purposeful, like those of law or 
science or medicine. Wiener’s garbage language works because garbage 
is what we produce mindlessly in the course of our days and because it 
smells horrible and looks ugly and we don’t think about it except when 
we’re saying that it’s bad, as I am right now.28
Chapter 3 concurred with Young’s distaste at the lazy, vague, often mean￾ingless terms people use as linguistic shortcuts or camouflage. If you don’t 
know what you want to say, or don’t want to say it clearly, these terms will 
help you in the short term. In the medium to long term, though, as we saw, 84 Radical Reporting
they prevent organizations from operating effectively and transparently. I 
am happy enough with “corporatespeak,” a term I’ve used throughout, but 
am open to other suggestions.
After all, why not BAU-speak? George Orwell invented the term 
“Newspeak” for his novel 1984, which showed how well totalitarian 
regimes appreciate the power of language to manipulate and deceive. For 
those interested in social sciences, Alan Ross created the term “U-speak” for 
the language used by the English aristocracy (the upper classes, hence U).29
Why not BAU-speak, so that, in keeping with politics and sociology, busi￾ness too has its own term?
Most people understand the three-letter acronym30 BAU to mean business 
as usual, which is exactly my point. Whenever middle managers use the lat￾est linguistic fad, they aren’t being creative or innovative – quite the oppo￾site. They are engaging in business as usual: the tired practice of trying to 
inflate everyday tasks, or obscure poor performance, through inaccurate, 
off-putting, often pretentious language.
Louise McKay has pinpointed how seductive and dangerous this practice 
is when she highlights “the tendency of all organizations to lapse into jargon 
and corporatespeak. People assume that there is a common understanding 
of that language. However, it’s surprising sometimes to find how hazy cer￾tain definitions are.” This goes back to my point about “crutch words” in 
Chapter 3 – terms people use automatically, reaching for them out of ease 
rather than deliberate choice. We all have them – becoming aware of them 
is the first step to reducing their use and power.
I could spend several pages dissecting some of my current least-favorite 
corporatespeak terms. Ones that come immediately to mind include 
“onboarding,”31 “upskill,” “value-added,” and “paradigm shift.” Since I 
remember people mocking this last term back in the 1990s, it can hardly be 
at the cutting edge of expression – hence BAU-speak. However, writers 
including Steven Poole and Don Watson have devoted entire books to the 
topic, while Martin Cutts’ Oxford Guide to Plain English includes a table 
of “plain words,” encouraging simple terms in favor of more archaic or 
pompous ones.32 For internal auditors, the classic Sawyer’s Internal Auditing
devotes three chapters to reports and includes a list of plain words. “Write 
to communicate your findings and express your ideas,” the authors rightly 
say, “not to impress someone with your knowledge.”33
One category of corporate jargon many people struggle with is associated 
with business methodologies. Many of you will have heard of – or have quali￾fications in – Six Sigma, Lean, Agile, and other approaches to process improve￾ment and project management. My own experience of this kind of thing dates 
back to PRINCE 2, which I found reasonably clear and sensible. Since then, 
however, an entire industry has grown up around creating hierarchies, training, 
and a specific language for different ways to do things. Often the approaches 
themselves come from environments where they make perfect sense. Translated 
into completely different settings, however, what thrives is the terminology: 
green and black belts, scrums, and buttered badgers (I made that one up).Clarity: the practice 85
It’s not entirely clear to me – or to many researchers who have devoted 
their lives to studying this – whether these approaches produce better results. 
It can be hard to discern such things when the vocabulary alone distracts 
and often irritates. If you have to review an area or project that uses an 
“agile” methodology, you will probably have to refer to some of its termi￾nology. Keep the reader in mind, though – parroting the latest management 
fad rarely conveys useful information.
The resources at the end of this book include the works cited above – 
Cutts, Poole, Watson, and others – all of which promote clear writing and 
meaningful reporting. These books will help you not only expand your 
vocabulary, but also build your confidence. You alone are responsible for 
conveying your message clearly, and the more options you have, the greater 
your scope. According to David Foster Wallace,
In order for your sentences not to make the reader’s eyes glaze over, 
you can’t simply use the same core set of words, particularly impor￾tant nouns and verbs, over and over and over again…. Having a good 
vocabulary ups the chances that we’re going to be able to know the 
right word, even if that’s the plainest word that will do and to achieve 
some kind of elegant variation, which I am kind of a fiend for.34
Not all of us can achieve elegant variation – but at least we can try to avoid 
making our readers’ eyes glaze over.
This isn’t to say that you should try to use unusual words, or seek to 
impress the reader with your verbal acumen. After all, even if you had a 
sports car capable of achieving the highest speeds, you wouldn’t always 
drive that fast. It’s about having the widest selection to choose from, so that 
every word does exactly what you and the reader need.
Remember – the English language is global. This means that it belongs to 
all of us. Many people – especially native speakers in the UK – have told me 
they don’t feel confident using their own language. Why? Maybe they speak 
with a regional accent, or lapse into dialect, as the colleague I mentioned 
earlier did, and were mocked. Some say they weren’t good at English at 
school, learning only later that they had dyslexia. Some believe that only 
people who study English at university can claim to “be good” at writing in 
English. (Guess what – I didn’t study English at university.)
Let this book comfort and encourage you – English belongs to you and 
indeed to all of us. And using it consciously and in good faith enriches the 
language for everyone. Corporatespeak enriches nothing. So, if you want to 
use language more clearly and usefully, look to the resources.
Mechanical mistakes: Basic accuracy
Please don’t be offended. You may well be the person every team needs, 
who points out that buildings can be evacuated, but people can’t (unless 
under medical supervision). You may be the one whose teeth grind every 
time you see someone using “actionable” to mean “feasible” or, even better, 86 Radical Reporting
“doable.” You may think “uninterested” and “disinterested” are always 
interchangeable. (Maybe you don’t care, because you don’t see how it could 
possibly affect you.)
However, if you’re not that person, you may well want to think about 
these points. Most people assume that they generally match their words 
to their meanings, and they usually do. It’s extremely easy, though, to 
assume a word you often hear is accurate – or even a word. I’ve read 
dozens of reports that have had me wondering how I could have missed 
the invention of a particular word everyone has started using. Sometimes 
I have to look up whether the primary meaning has changed – “action￾able” is a perfect example. (Answer: It hasn’t. If your report proudly lists 
events you claim are “actionable,” you should have a good lawyer on 
retainer.)
Rob Reinalda is an experienced writer and editor, and author of Why 
Editors Drink. One of the things he highlights is the complacency that leads 
people to write without checking.
If only there were reference materials that explained the distinction. … 
Looking stuff up used to require getting up, walking over to the diction￾ary, flipping through its pages (maybe puzzling over the whole alpha￾betical order thing), finding the word, and often cross-referencing it 
– consulting a different book, a thesaurus, to ensure you’re using exactly 
the right term. Now, you simply type a word or phrase into a search 
engine, and an array of options will pop up. With a few clicks, you can 
see the words’ definitions, etymology, synonyms, antonyms, Cinnabons, 
Auntie Em – yet people refuse to double-check for proper usage.35
Misused words aren’t the only trap lying in wait for the unwary (or indif￾ferent) writer. One category of words – contranyms, or Janus-words – can 
seriously mislead readers. These words have two definitions, each the oppo￾site of the other. Several of them are common in reporting, which makes 
it even more important to be alert to them. For example, “sanction” can 
mean to approve or to forbid, because its fundamental meaning is to enact 
something by law. If you say that senior managers have sanctioned changing 
a process, do you mean that they have permitted or banned it?
Another example is “oversight,” which usually means “supervision” in 
reports. However, it can also mean a lapse in attention, a mistake. You could 
therefore have a report that says, “This error occurred because of manage￾ment oversight. It will be corrected because of management oversight.” 
(Note that the second sentence also features a passive. Bad habits of writing 
tend to hang out together, like a gang of word-thugs, ready to bludgeon the 
poor reader into submission.)
If your report reviewer or line manager is the kind of person described in 
the first paragraph, consider what you may be unintentionally inflicting on 
them. There are few things more irritating than having to correct Clarity: the practice 87
vocabulary in a report, not because of personal style, but because of basic 
accuracy. Words do have meanings, and we have ways of checking them. 
Bookmark – or buy – at least one reputable, standard English-language 
dictionary for everyday reference. The most trusted include Cambridge 
English, Chambers, Collins, Merriam-Webster, Oxford English, and Random 
House dictionaries. The websites for these works also offer thesauruses, 
which are helpful when you want to vary your wording, or search for the 
exact shade of meaning.
Mechanical mistakes: Grammar (including punctuation)
My original plan had been to devote a separate chapter to grammar. 
However, an early reviewer suggested including the topic in this chapter, 
given how many resources are available elsewhere. The lengthy resources 
list at the end of this book will prove the reviewer right.
Yet it’s still worth covering why grammar regularly features in most books 
and training about report-writing. Most people should have covered the topic 
in elementary or primary school, yet many of them will claim to still be con￾fused. This could be because the grammar teaching they received was poor or 
nonexistent. We can include in this category exceedingly rigid approaches, as 
these usually indicate a superficial grasp of the subject and thus an unhealthy 
obsession with a few “rules.” (Yes, I will explain why I wrote “rules” shortly.)
This takes us back to the concepts of self-consciousness and fear when 
communicating in the workplace. Many people have experienced managers 
wielding red pens, or tracking changes, across draft reports. Sometimes the 
managers’ comments will be accurate or useful. More often, the comments 
will betray confusion about the purpose of a review, as well as a deep-seated 
need to impose one’s style on others.
We can’t organize counseling for every manager who thinks “reviewing” 
means “rewriting.” What we can do is recognize some important differences. 
First, I’ve heard many managers say they have to rewrite people’s reports 
because “of all the glaring grammatical mistakes.” When I look at the reports 
in question, there are never as many “glaring grammatical mistakes” as I 
was told. What I do see are numerous unnecessary stylistic changes, none of 
which changes the meaning. This is what people mean what they complain 
about managers and other reviewers “wordsmithing” reports.
Now, a “wordsmith” should be a fine thing, like a goldsmith or silver￾smith – someone who creates beautiful and useful things from precious 
materials. The term “wordsmithing” in the workplace, though, usually 
means people who endlessly carp and cavil over wording to no good end.
What is more telling is the number of times the “wordsmithing” over￾looks basic errors in spelling, grammar, usage, and punctuation. In other 
words, the same managers who complain about their teams’ poor grammar 
can’t even see it.88 Radical Reporting
Why does it matter? After all, many people will say that the only people 
who care about grammar and punctuation are the managers who claim to 
be experts in it, and then use that claim to browbeat their colleagues. No 
wonder it puts people off.
It matters because it can confuse or obscure meaning. Consider a sentence 
frequent in banking: “This incident has affected all of the customers 
accounts.” Without an apostrophe, the reader has no idea if the incident has 
affected all of the accounts belonging to all customers (“the customers’ 
accounts”) or all the accounts belonging to a single, but extremely impor￾tant customer (“the customer’s accounts”). Similarly, if someone sends an 
email saying, “Let’s go break the managers legs,” readers wouldn’t know if 
the sender proposed maiming only one manager (“the manager’s legs”) or 
several (“the managers’ legs”). (I hope they would call the police, though.)
It’s not just the oft-dreaded apostrophe that can muddle meaning. 
Misplaced modifiers are a common source of misinterpretation. (Quick 
aside: a modifier is a word or phrase that modifies another word or phrase. 
It should – in standard English – be placed as close as possible to the thing 
it modifies. Remember: “Modifiers are like teenagers: they fall in love with 
whatever they’re next to.”36)
Spot the difference in meaning in the following four sentences, all featur￾ing the modifier “only”.
• Only we reviewed the IT security governance framework.
• We only reviewed the IT security governance framework.
• We reviewed only the IT security governance framework.
• We reviewed the only IT security governance framework.
The first sentence states that we are the only people to have reviewed the 
framework – no one else did. The second sentence means that the review 
was the only action we carried out – we only reviewed it; we didn’t design 
it or manage it. The third sentence says that of all the things to review, the 
only one we did review was the framework. The fourth sentence makes clear 
that there is only one framework – no others.
If any of this seems confusing, remember to consult the resources list, 
which includes books and websites that go into more detail, give many 
examples, and even have interactive exercises and quizzes. However, you 
can also use a technique common to professional writers the world over: 
read your text out loud. This will help you spot errors that spelling- and 
grammar-checkers may overlook – “colleges” where you meant to write 
“colleagues,” for instance. It will also alert you to anything confusing or 
ambiguous (such as a misplaced modifier). My tip is to read aloud and trust 
yourself. If something sounds fine, it probably is; you’ve likely created a 
simple, clear sentence that won’t frustrate the reader. If you stumble over a 
word or sentence, though, it’s a sign you need to change something in it.37
Everyone – including professional writers and editors – makes mistakes. 
It can be because we’re tired, distracted, or simply never felt confident Clarity: the practice 89
spelling “accommodation.” What we need to do is be alert to the possibility, 
use any resources or help we can, and correct mistakes before they go out in 
a final version.
Making mistakes is not in itself morally reprehensible (although some 
people’s reactions to a typo would make you think so). The problem is that 
at worst, they can confuse, and at best distract the reader. I recently read a 
book that, while extremely useful, entertaining, and well written, had so 
many basic errors in spelling, grammar, punctuation, and usage, that I 
couldn’t focus. The copyediting process at the publisher had clearly failed, 
but it was the reader who suffered.
There can also be more serious consequences to grammatical mistakes. 
Cecelia Watson, in her brief yet brilliant book Semicolon, devotes two chap￾ters to legal cases arising from the (mis)use of that poor, misunderstood 
punctuation mark.38 There are also recent cases where plaintiffs relied on 
the interpretation of a punctuation mark to claim, sometimes successfully, 
millions of dollars.39 These can be amusing to read – unlike the cases where 
a misplaced mark meant life or death.40
There are many people who believe grammar is always a life-or-death 
matter. They are also often wrong, as the linguist David Shariatmadari says. 
In his book Don’t Believe a Word, he devotes a chapter to the eternal and 
tedious chorus of people who bemoan what they see as poor use of lan￾guage. Time and again, as he and others have proved, their very complaints 
show their ignorance. “If they’re so concerned about language,” 
Shariatmadari writes, “you have to wonder: why haven’t they bothered to 
get to know it a little better?”41
The next time someone tells you that you can’t start a sentence with “but,” 
or put a comma before “and,” or split an infinitive, refer them to some 
experts on the subject. Martin Cutts, in his Oxford Guide to Plain English, 
has an entire chapter on language myths. Benjamin Dreyer also tackles some 
widespread but ill-informed beliefs in his book, Dreyer’s English: An Utterly 
Correct Guide to Clarity and Style.
This comes down to understanding what grammar is. It is how we organize 
our language, and is made up of syntax (word order) and morphology (how 
words change in sentences). As language changes, so grammar changes. Jane 
Austen regularly used apostrophes in her possessive pronouns, whereas now￾adays we never do. Instead of “rules,” we can perhaps talk about “guidelines.” 
Instead of talking about “proper” English (as people who get upset about split 
infinitives, without knowing what they are, tend to do), let’s say “standard.” 
Grammar snobs will always be with us, claiming there was once a golden age 
in which everyone spoke and wrote perfectly accurate English. As if.
English belongs to all of us. There is no excuse not to become better 
informed and more confident. Look at the resources at the back of this 
book, as well as any others people recommend. Use what works for you – if 
you find a particular author’s tone intimidating, or a website hard to navi￾gate, use something else. There are too many excellent works out there not 
to be able to find something, or many things, that are right for you.90 Radical Reporting
Mechanical mistakes: Usage
If you think grammar is contentious, consider “usage,” defined best by Jack 
Lynch as “how to use something properly.”42 You can avoid most mistakes 
in usage by relying on the resources I’ve mentioned throughout this chapter: 
dictionaries, thesauruses, and guides to clear writing and plain language.
You will always encounter people whose views on usage differ from 
yours. This may be down to national or regional differences.43 When I 
worked in Edinburgh, many colleagues used the Scots term “outwith” 
instead of “outside.” My view was that this was perfectly fine for commu￾nications among Scots. However, the bank was a global one, meaning that 
region- or nation-specific terms quickly confused colleagues from other 
locations. Therefore, I reasoned, any communications sent to people out￾side Scotland should use the standard English term “outside.” Although 
some people resented having to adapt their vocabulary, they understood the 
purpose.
There are also people who – similar to the grammar snobs – categorize 
their preferred terms as the correct usage and everyone else’s as poor 
usage or even wrong. Chapter 9 will discuss in detail how these and other 
factors can complicate the review process. For now, though, you should 
explore the recommended resources – especially dictionaries – and use 
them to have a discussion. Often people with fixed ideas about “proper 
English,” including grammar and usage, are astonishingly unaware of the 
very things they profess to love and defend, as Shariatmadari made clear 
in the quote above.
One topical point of usage is inclusive language, which was mentioned in 
the previous chapter’s activity. In French, many people are adapting their 
writing to include both female and male in gendered terms. This is because 
the traditional approach was to subsume the female into the male, even if 
the female was greater in number. For example, a document about custom￾ers would use the term “clients” (masculine plural) even if there were 99 
female clients (“clientes”) and only one male. Nowadays, you will see docu￾ments using “client⋅e⋅s.” There are, of course, debates about this – explicit 
and deliberate changes to language rarely happen without an argument. 
However, it illustrates how language can be seen to exclude or include.
In English, we haven’t had gendered nouns for some time. However, until 
recently, the default pronoun when speaking of a person was “he” – it was 
assumed that the male would include the female. Many women rightly 
objected to being subsumed in this way. But how to solve the problem? 
Common options include using “he or she,” “s/he,” or even alternating “he” 
and “she.” So the French document about clients would, when speaking of a 
hypothetical singular client, say “He will expect good service,” followed by, 
“She also considers value for money.” This can be confusing, though.
Another option is to use “they”: “When a client walks into a shop, they 
expect good service. They also consider value for money.” It’s common for Clarity: the practice 91
people to claim that you simply cannot use a plural pronoun (“they”) to 
refer to a singular. Yet for centuries, people have used “they” in this way.44
Consider your audience, refer to your organization’s style guide (if it 
exists), and decide for yourself. Whoever reads your report, they are sure to 
appreciate the effort.
Finally, if you are ever tempted to use gendered language for 
occupations – don’t. Even the 19th-century author Ambrose Bierce found it 
ridiculous: “Poetess. A foolish word, like ‘authoress’.”45
HELP IS AT HAND
Earlier, you saw how tools such as Microsoft Word readability statistics, 
Hemingway Editor, and Grammarly can help you improve reports. Wherever 
you can reliably use technology to alert you to clunky or confusing wording, 
do. It’s easier and often more accurate than trying to do it yourself, espe￾cially when you are tired and too close to the document.
There are also other, less mechanical, resources. First, have you looked at 
your professional body’s website? Many offer advice, links, and sample doc￾uments tailored to your everyday work. Keep in mind that resources are 
often available only to members, so you may need login credentials to access 
the organization’s materials.
You may be surprised by how professional bodies address not just report￾ing standards, but also wording. The American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants has a Center for Plain English Accounting site (www.aicpa.org/
interestareas/centerforplainenglishaccounting.html), as well as workpaper 
templates available through its main site (https://future.aicpa.org/home). 
Meanwhile, Chartered Accountants Ireland has produced advice on report￾ing to third parties, including “examples of types of engagement wording or 
of opinions that are unacceptable to accountants providing reports.”46
Although produced for Irish accountants, this type of advice can be useful 
to internal and external auditors, as well as risk managers, across the globe. 
Much of it is sound common sense and awareness of language.
If you belong to a professional organization or body, you will doubtless 
have standards, including a code of ethics and guidance for carrying out 
your work. The Institute of Internal Auditors’ Global Internal Audit 
Standards task the chief audit executive with promoting “accurate, objec￾tive, clear, concise, constructive, complete, and timely internal audit com￾munications” throughout an engagement.47 If the ABCs described above 
– being active, brief, and concrete – can help you meet this standard, how 
else can they improve your writing?
It’s worth casting your resource net more widely. Maybe your profes￾sional body doesn’t offer up-to-date advice, or guidance relevant to your 
organization. One person who thinks creatively about how to make 
reports both compliant and effective is Komitas Stepanyan. As Technology 92 Radical Reporting
and Cybersecurity Director at the Central Bank of Armenia, Komitas is 
well placed to appreciate both the complex information his team needs to 
report and their readers’ needs. The first point he makes takes us back to 
the ABCs, with the need to be brief:
There are different types of reports and the report-writer needs to clearly 
understand “who is the audience?”. The higher your position, the more 
reports you will have. If you have more than ten reports, and if every 
report is more than two pages, then mostly probably you will not be 
able to read all the reports. Statistics show that many top managers do 
not read reports more than 1.5 pages.
To achieve clear, compelling reporting, Komitas urges his team to think cre￾atively and use their imaginations.
Where can you find different approaches to inspire your own thinking, 
and create new ways to improve your reporting? There are many sources of 
writing advice on the internet, along with training and coaching services. 
Depending on your country, language, culture, professional sector, and area 
of expertise, these can range from irrelevant to extremely useful.
Plain language is a common goal in many organizations, explicitly so for 
many federal or local government bodies. However, many people assume that 
plain-English or plain-language entities using “campaign,” “foundation,” or 
similar words in their names must be objective, not-for-profit, or other public￾interest organizations. This is not always the case. However, two of my favor￾ite resources are indeed not-for-profit organizations: Plain Language 
Association International, which is staffed by volunteers, and the US 
Government’s Plain Language site, staffed by (paid) government employees.
I mentioned in this and previous chapters how personal communication 
and writing styles are. This means that anyone who wants to help others com￾municate well should be able to do so themselves. This may seem obvious, but 
many of you will have experienced well-intentioned managers who cannot 
write well advising – or dictating – how others should write. It’s a common 
human failing – haven’t we all heard the famous “Do as I say, not as I do”?
In trainers and consultants, however, there is an ethical as well as a logical 
problem. Going back to the link between language, logic, and morality, it is 
fundamentally dishonest to charge people or organizations for advice on a 
skill one does not have. There are report-writing trainers whose own writing 
is unreadable or includes sloppy mistakes, and communications consultants 
who seem oblivious or indifferent to corporatespeak. Similarly, someone 
who criticizes other people’s usage and issues lists of “banned” or “required” 
terms probably doesn’t understand the history of language. Language – any 
language – is too rich and complex for anyone to reduce it to a list of per￾sonal habits and beliefs, let alone present this list as universal truth.
If a writing consultant cannot do what they advise others to do – or worse, 
cannot see the problem with their inability – then they cannot claim to be 
competent. Similarly, someone who claims to be an expert in cross-cultural Clarity: the practice 93
communication but speaks only one language (usually English) may not 
even be aware of the nuances and insights overlooked. This can introduce 
risk into communications, rather than reduce it.
If careless, vague, or clichéd language undermines credibility in reports, it 
does so tenfold when used by anyone who professes to be an expert in clear 
writing. So, if you are seeking professional expertise and advice in report￾writing (and there are many excellent providers), check first how that orga￾nization or individual uses language. If you see “upskill,” “onboarding,” 
“value-added,” or similar linguistic red flags, look for another provider. 
After all, why would you pay anyone money to advise you on the very thing 
they cannot or will not do?
HELP YOURSELF, HELP YOUR READERS
The advice and resources provided in this chapter are simple, but not easy. 
As we’ve said several times, it takes time, effort, and discipline to rigorously 
analyze our own thinking and carefully choose the most precise way to 
express it. Many of the reasons why people shun good practice are familiar 
to use from Chapter 3. Habit, tiredness, and fear all conspire to make peo￾ple produce unreadable writing.
Being aware of these factors, and consciously working to overcome them, 
will produce better writing every time. If you apply the content of this chap￾ter to everything you write, it will improve your skills and make every sub￾sequent task easier.
Earlier we used the analogy of building a house: clear thinking and plain 
language are the foundations, without which any house will fall. Another 
house analogy applies to reviewing your own or someone else’s work. If you 
want to clean your house, or do any other work in it, it’s better to clear all 
surfaces of clutter first. Similarly, if you declutter your writing, you and 
other readers can more easily do the work of grasping the message and tak￾ing useful action.
It’s hard work, and it can sometimes be even harder to get colleagues to 
accept clear writing. It requires resisting corporate habits and overcoming 
individual fears. However, if you or others fear that clear writing and plain 
language may come across as rude, try to reframe the problem. A clear mes￾sage saves your reader time and puts him or her in a better position to 
address gaps and failures. It also makes the organization’s governance stron￾ger, more transparent. As John Chesshire says, he expects reports to be
clear, concise, evidence-based, jargon-free and active, please. I have a 
small brain, so I need to be able to easily understand what is being said. 
I want to see the important things highlighted, and practical, pragmatic, 
relevant solutions recommended and agreed. The reports have to gener￾ate an enthusiasm for action and improvement, where necessary. I want 
people to read our reports and to keep turning the pages to the end.94 Radical Reporting
One carefully chosen, precise word is better than masses of words shim￾mering coyly around the message. Your readers’ time is limited, their atten￾tion spans overloaded. Keeping your words few and judicious increases the 
chance people will keep turning the pages to the end – and then act.
ACTIVITIES
• Look at a recent piece of analysis you wrote - it can be an investigation, 
review, or audit. Tracing your work back to its beginning, what types of 
reasoning did you use - deductive, inductive, or abductive? Why?
• During your next meeting or interview with a colleague or client, identify 
what types of reasoning and barriers to reasoning this person displays. 
Then think about why this person uses those types of reasoning, or is 
hindered by certain barriers to reasoning. You may need to consider cor￾porate or team culture as a cause.
• Think of any “crutch” words or phrases that you overuse. By this, I mean 
the words and phrases that abound in corporate life and that we get 
into the habit of using unthinkingly. Stakeholder, utilize, leverage, lessons 
learned, impact…the list goes on. The reason I call them “crutch” words 
is that we lean on them when we feel tired or weak. But if we lean on 
them too much, the mental muscle of vocabulary – and choosing precise 
words to convey exact meanings – atrophies.
• Look at a recent document you drafted and use software to gauge readabil￾ity. Where do you have the most trouble – overuse of passive voice, lengthy 
sentences, zombie nouns? Redraft two or three sentences to see how you 
could communicate your message more clearly by following the ABCs.
• Only once you have drafted a piece of writing, see what an LLM such as 
ChatGPT might produce on the same topic. Making sure that you don’t 
include any sensitive or personal data, create a series of prompts in plain 
language on the topic you’ve written about. Compare the LLM output 
with what you have written. Is it better? Worse? Where are the gaps, 
assumptions, or hallucinations in the LLM-produced text? Where has it 
summarized more concisely?
• Find out if your organization has a corporate style guide. Sometimes this 
will simply cover aesthetics and branding: acceptable colors, fonts, and 
logos. Sometimes, though, it will be similar to an editorial style guide, 
setting out regional or national language preferences and giving advice 
on communicating clearly. Does it cover the ABCs? Does it give accurate 
and coherent advice about word choices? If not, or if you think the guide 
could be clearer, consider contacting the document owners and (diplo￾matically) offering to help when they next review the material.Clarity: the practice 95
• Look up the website/s relevant to your profession or activity. What advice 
and guidance do they provide about communications, reporting, and tem￾plates? Is it useful and relevant to your work? If so, can you share what you’ve 
found with colleagues, perhaps in a team meeting? This could be an excellent 
way to acquire continuous professional education or development (CPE/
CPD) credits, as well as to improve professional practice in the team.
SUMMARY
• Before writing, we must think clearly. Understanding different types of 
reasoning – inductive, deductive, and abductive – can help us see where 
our critical thinking succeeds or fails.
• Barriers to reasoning are common to all of us. Bias and settled belief are 
often subconscious and therefore harder to detect. Confusing correla￾tion with causation often leads to flawed conclusions.
• To write clearly, use the ABCs: active, brief, and concrete.
• Being active means favoring active over passive voice.
• Being brief means cutting unnecessary words and phrases.
• Being concrete means favoring verbs over zombie nouns. Too many zom￾bie nouns in a sentence make it not only longer and more lumbering, but 
also more abstract and less engaging for readers.
• If 80% of your writing in English is active, it will be more readable. 
Sentences below 20 words will allow your readers to take a breath. 
Readability statistics will help you measure these.
• Large language models (LLMs) can help you draft material, with several cave￾ats. Be wary of using any confidential company or personal data in prompts, 
and double-check any text an LLM produces for accuracy. As always, plain 
language will help you – in this case, in drafting prompts for the LLM.
• Using these principles and tools in everything you write, no matter how 
small, will quickly improve your confidence and competence. It will also 
make your other workplace tasks – including the review process – easier.
• Other hindrances to clear writing include personal hang-ups and corpo￾ratespeak, which you will have recognized from previous chapters.
• Mechanical mistakes can irritate or even mislead the reader. And it will 
give ammunition to the army of grammar snobs out there!
• Numerous resources can help you, including reference works (listed 
at the back of this book), professional bodies, trainers, and consultants. 
Choose what best suits your field, and make sure advisors have the 
required skills.96 Radical Reporting
NOTES
1 The Institute of Internal Auditors Audit Executive Center, 2017 North American 
Pulse of Internal Audit. Courageous Leadership: Instilling Confidence from 
Within (Lake Mary, Florida: The Institute of Internal Auditors, 2017), 26.
2 Joseph Holzman, “Current Regional Trends and Approaches to Critical 
Thinking,” report from Goucher College micro-internship with Getting Words 
to Work®, January 2022.
3 Journal of Accounting Education, 21:3 (3rd Quarter 2003), 215–37. www.sci￾encedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0748575103000277
4 Grant, 25.
5 I first explained the ABCs (and used the term “radical reporting”) in a Chartered 
Institute of Internal Auditors event (June 2014). See also “Breaking Down the 
Audit Report,” Internal Auditor (July 2021), https://iaonline.theiia.org/2021/
Pages/Breaking-Down-the-Audit-Report.aspx
6 A note for the grammar-heads reading this. Yes, I could use terms like “subject” 
and “object,” but that requires further clarification. After all, both sentences start 
with a subject. So I think it’s easier to think in terms of doer/action/done-to
7 Orwell, “Politics,” 119.
8 Sara I. James and Richard Chambers, “An Active Voice in Internal Audit Reports 
Inspires Action,” AuditBoard blog, September 20, 2023. www.auditboard.com/
blog/an-active-voice-in-internal-audit-inspires-action/
9 Thanks to Matthew Stibbe of Articulate Marketing for passing this tip on to 
me; he learned it from copywriter extraordinaire Clare Dodd. And copyeditor 
extraordinaire Benjamin Dreyer cites it in his excellent Dreyer’s English: An 
Utterly Correct Guide to Clarity and Style (London: Arrow Books, 2020), 15. It 
also features in Yellowlees Douglas’ The Reader’s Brain: How Neuroscience Can 
Make You a Better Writer (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), 37.
10 “Colson Whitehead’s Rules for Writing” (2012) https://crhofmann.
com/2012/08/27/colson-whiteheads-rules-for-writing/). You could say that he’s 
taken more words than Jefferson to say the same thing, and you’d be right. 
But Whitehead is a master of prose in English, and he’s also slipped in a refer￾ence to Arthur Quiller-Crouch’s famous “murder your darlings” (“On the Art 
of Writing,” Lectures Delivered in the University of Cambridge, 1913–1914, 
www.bartleby.com/190/), so he can do as he likes. (I think we can safely assume 
Whitehead’s third sentence is tongue in cheek.)
11 Author of The Oxford Guide to Plain English, co-founder of the Plain English 
Campaign and founder of Plain Language Commission.
12 Oppenheimer, “Consequences.”
13 Barbara Ehrenreich, Bait and Switch: The Futile Pursuit of the Corporate Dream
(London: Granta Books, 2006), 28
14 “My English will never be ‘perfect’ – and that’s what keeps a language alive,” The 
Guardian, June 28, 2021. www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/jun/28/
english-perfect-language-arabic.
15 Garner’s Modern English Usage. 4th ed. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2016), 983 (on which page I also learn that those of us taught to use the term 
“nominalization” are “jargonmongers”). Philip Collins discusses the pitfalls 
of nominalizations under “abstraction and abstract nouns” in To Be Clear: A 
Style Guide for Business Writing (London: Quercus, 2021), 53–54. See also 
Garner, The Chicago Guide to Grammar, Usage, and Punctuation (London: Clarity: the practice 97
University of Chicago Press, 2016), 451. I have used the term “verbal noun” 
interchangeably with “nominalization” for many years. According to Garner, 
though, “verbal noun” refers exclusively to gerunds. David Crystal agrees 
(The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the English Language. 2nd ed. [Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2003], 203), while dictionaries differ. Some define 
“verbal noun” as a gerund only, while others take a broader view: “verbal 
noun n. (formerly also †noun verbal) [after post-classical Latin nomen verbale
(5th or 6th cent. in grammarians)] Grammar a noun formed from an inflection 
of a verb and partly sharing its constructions.” (Oxford English Dictionary, 
www.oed.com/view/Entry/222360?redirectedFrom=verbal+noun# 
eid1222298520).
16 Cutts, Oxford Guide, 78.
17 It also features a grammatical mistake. “Needs” should be “need” as it refers to 
“retention and completion,” two actions and therefore plural. But when sen￾tences are this complex and confusing to read, it’s not surprising errors creep in 
and no one then spots them. I’ll discuss word-blindness in Chapter 9.
18 BP, Deepwater Horizon.
19 For a humorous example demonstrating the reverse, visit the US Government’s 
Plain Language site’s “Nine Easy Steps to Longer Sentences,” www.plainlan￾guage.gov/resources/humor/nine-easy-steps-to-longer-sentences/
20 A. R. Moon, Office English (London: Ginn and Company Ltd., 1961), v.
21 Rogers and Lasky-Fink, 75.
22 Alee Marschke, “AI in IA: The use of artificial intelligence in Internal Auditing,” 
report from Goucher College micro-internship with Getting Words to Work®, 
January 2024, 1.
23 Marschke, 4.
24 Lorelei Lingard, “Writing with ChatGPT: An Illustration of its Capacity, 
Limitations & Implications for Academic Writers,” Perspectives in Medical 
Education, 12:1 (2023): 261–270. 269. www.researchgate.net/publica￾tion/372025489_Writing_with_ChatGPT_An_Illustration_of_its_Capacity_
Limitations_Implications_for_Academic_Writers
25 IIA Global, Artificial Intelligence 101 Series: ChatGPT for Internal Auditors 
(2023), 14. www.theiia.org/en/content/tools/professional/2023/artificial-in￾telligence-101-series-chatgpt-for-internal-auditors/. See also Irena Ostojic, 
“On the Frontlines: The Potential, and Perils, of ChatGPT,” IIA Global 
blog, October 23, 2023 https://internalauditor.theiia.org/en/voices/2023/
on-the-frontlines-the-potential-and-perils-of-chatgpt/
26 www.theguardian.com/technology/2024/apr/30/us-newspaper-openai-lawsuit
27 Lingard, 263. See also Mignon Fogarty’s AI Sidequests, including mention of 
“hallucination”: https://ai-sidequest.beehiiv.com/p/ai-trustworthy
28 Young, “Garbage language.” Philip Collins, however, would disagree with Young’s 
statement that jargon is “actually purposeful.” In To Be Clear, he says, “Genuine 
fields of scholarship, such as epidemiology or inorganic chemistry, have technical 
vocabularies for which there are no colloquial alternatives. Jargon, by contrast, 
is the deliberate translation of ordinary ideas into complicated word patterns in 
order to exclude the uninitiated. Business associates mimic their seniors to show 
that they belong. It makes a low art form sound like the highest science. But 
business is not a science. A business involves a complex array of human interac￾tions. It is part history, part sociology and part anthropology. It is a realm not of 
scientific proof but of rhetorical proof.” (31)98 Radical Reporting
29 “U and Non-U: An Essay in Sociological Linguistics,” Noblesse Oblige, ed. 
Nancy Mitford (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1956), 1–28. The other essays in the collec￾tion are funny as well as insightful – unless you are the kind of person who gets 
nervous about using the “wrong” term for items of furniture or meals. Trust me, 
life is too short.
30 “Being able to fluently use acronyms gives us a sense that we have mas￾tered the strange linguistic games that fuel organisations. With proficient 
display of the arts of the acronym, people can feel that they are more skilled, 
knowledgeable and worthy of their position.” (Spicer, Business Bullshit, 
37). See also Turpin, Martin Harry, Mane Kara-Yakoubiam, Alexander 
C. Walker, Heather E. K. Walker, Jonathan A. Fugelsang, and Jennifer A. 
Stolz, “Bullshit Ability as an Honest Signal of Intelligence,” Evolutionary 
Psychology (April–June, 2021): 1–10, https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
pdf/10.1177/14747049211000317
31 So I’ll let Benjamin Dreyer do it for me: “The use of ‘onboard’ as a verb in place 
of ‘familiarise’ or ‘integrate’ is grotesque. It’s bad enough when applied to poli￾cies; applied to new employees in place of the perfectly lovely word ‘orient’, it’s 
worse. And it feels like a terribly short walk from onboarding a new employee to 
waterboarding one.” (Dreyer’s English, 157).
32 Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020, 48–56.
33 Sawyer, Lawrence B. and Mortimer A. Dittenhofer, assisted by James H. Scheiner, 
Sawyer’s Internal Auditing: The Practice of Modern Internal Auditing. 4th ed. 
(Altamonte Springs, Florida: The Institute of Internal Auditors, 1996), 781.
34 Garner, Quack This Way, 113.
35 Rob Reinalda, Why Editors Drink (Word Czar Media, 2020), 13.
36 From the peerless Capital Community College Guide to Grammar and Writing, 
https://guidetogrammar.org/grammar/modifiers.htm
37 Yellowlees Douglas discusses visual, speech, and auditory systems and their over￾lapping roles in helping us interpret both written and spoken communication 
(148–54).
38 Cecelia Watson, Semicolon: How A Misunderstood Punctuation Mark Can 
Improve Your Writing, Enrich Your Reading and Even Change Your Life
(London: 4th Estate, 2019), 57–69, 71–89.
39 Elena Cresci, “Oxford comma helps drivers win dispute about overtime pay,” 
The Guardian, March 16, 2017, www.theguardian.com/books/2017/mar/ 
16/oxford-comma-helps-drivers-win-dispute-about-overtime-pay; Jon Sharman, 
“Oxford comma proves pivotal in delivery drivers’ claim for overtime pay,” The 
Independent, March 17, 2017, www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/
oxford-comma-drivers-claim-overtime-pay-dispute-a7635991.html
40 Chris Stokel-Walker, “The commas that cost companies millions,” BBC 
Worklife, July 23, 2018, www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20180723-the-commas￾that-cost-companies-millions
41 David Shariatmadari, Don’t Believe a Word: From Myths to Misunderstandings – 
How Language Really Works (London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2019), 40. All 
of Chapter 1, “Language is Going to the Dogs,” 21–40, is excellent on the persis￾tence and ignorance of grammar snobs. See also Dreyer, “Rules and Non-Rules,” 
Dreyer’s English, 7–19; Lane Greene, “Is Language Logic?,” Talk on the Wild Side: 
The Untameable Nature of Language (London: The Economist/Profile Books 
Ltd, 2018), 32–64; and John McWhorter, Our Magnificent Bastard Tongue: The 
Untold History of English (New York: Gotham Books, 2008), 63–64.Clarity: the practice 99
42 Guide to Grammar and Style, http://jacklynch.net/Writing/u.html
43 See Dreyer, 70–81. “A Note on Indian English” (73–75) will help anyone better 
appreciate the origins and richness of the English used by the second-largest 
English-speaking population in the world.
44 Cutts has an excellent chapter on inclusive language (Oxford Guide, 194–204), 
and Dreyer discusses it wittily and sensitively (Dreyer’s English, 88–92). Readers 
with a more literary bent may enjoy Anne Fadiman’s “The His’er Problem,” Ex 
Libris: Confessions of a Common Reader (London: Penguin, 1998), 58–64. See 
also “What’s in a word? How less-gendered language is faring across Europe,” 
The Guardian, November 4, 2023. www.theguardian.com/world/2023/nov/04/
whats-in-a-word-how-less-gendered-language-is-faring-across-europe
45 Write It Right: A Little Blacklist of Literary Faults (New York: Neale Publishing 
Company, 1909; repub. with a new introduction by Paul Dickson, Mineola, 
New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 2010), 49. And yet, until recently, it was 
completely acceptable to say “manageress” in the UK (and likely still in some 
regions)!
46 Chartered Accountants Ireland, Technical Release 01 21: Reporting to Third 
Parties – Guidance for Accountants, 2021, 12–13 www.charteredaccountants.
ie/docs/default-source/technical-documents/technical-releases-alerts/tr-01_2021￾reporting-to-third-parties.pdf?sfvrsn=df13aa7c_2
47 The Institute of Internal Auditors, The Global Internal Audit StandardsTM. 
Lake Mary, Florida: The Institute of Internal Auditors, 2024, 79, https:// 
globalinternalauditstandards_2024january9_editable.pdf100 DOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-7
Chapter 5
Planning
This chapter is as important as the previous ones, and complements them. If 
you are willing to analyze your thoughts rigorously and seek the best words 
to convey them, then it’s only right to organize them logically.
You may think that your organization’s suite of standard templates will 
help you, and they may. That is, they may guide you as to which information 
goes in which parts of the template. What they won’t do is your thinking for 
you. That you must do yourself. Not only will it produce better reports, but 
it will make you feel more organized, confident, and in control of your sub￾ject matter. You’ll be surprised by how many benefits there are to organizing 
your thoughts before writing – benefits you probably never suspected.
Planning what you will say and in what order is essential to communicat￾ing clearly. If you don’t take time to plan, whatever emerges from your writ￾ing frenzy is likely to lack coherence and flow. Abraham Lincoln apparently 
said, “If I had five minutes to chop down a tree, I’d spend three minutes 
sharpening my axe.” Whether he said it or not, the principle is one that will 
guide us throughout this chapter and beyond. The most important thing to 
remember is that the bigger the task and the tighter the deadline, the greater 
your need to plan.
No one ever congratulated a writer on hitting an (often arbitrary) dead￾line by producing something incoherent. But the inherent logic of this prin￾ciple – if something’s important enough to say soon, it’s important to say it 
well – seems lost on most people. If you ask them what they would do if their 
house was on fire, they’d answer immediately: they’d call emergency services 
and shout “Fire!” Yet I’ve seen urgent incident reports, in the form of emails 
sent to board members in the middle of the night, that overlook this basic 
point. They should be the corporate equivalent of shouting “Fire!” – a few 
brief lines saying what and where the incident is, what is currently happen￾ing to manage it, and when readers can expect the next update.
One of these reports in email form ran to ten pages when printed out. 
Had there been a fire, the company’s site would have burned to the ground 
by the time anyone finished reading the report.
This chapter will help you avoid this and other problems: losing your way 
in detail; not focusing on the most important points; and failing to see Planning 101
important gaps and connections in your work. It will also suggest ways to 
share information in a timely and efficient way throughout investigations, 
reviews, and other engagements. This will, in turn, help you spend what time 
you have to write a final report more effectively.
We’re returning to questions of time and discipline raised in earlier chap￾ters. Whether reflecting on culture, choosing the right words, or forcing one￾self to plan before writing, it can be stressful to hit pause when faced with a 
deadline. Taking a step back and using proven techniques will impose order 
on our thoughts and therefore our writing.
There are managers who say their teams lack discipline in writing. Often it’s 
not exactly a lack of discipline at play. Most people don’t realize they should 
plan their writing. After all, they’ve gathered all the information needed for 
their report and have an approved template to dump it in, don’t they? So they 
charge in, filling the template with words and thoughts as they come, with 
predictable, usually unreadable results. An image that will remain with me 
forever comes from the American singer, actor, presenter, comedian, and activ￾ist Henry Rollins. At an Edinburgh Fringe event in 2012, he mentioned a US 
politician then in the headlines. “Whenever this man opens his mouth,” 
Rollins said, “it’s as though the words are trying to flee a fire inside his head.”
I’ve read hundreds of reports exactly like that. Often they arise from simply 
not having the tools; sometimes, from fear or panic. We must always recog￾nize our emotions when writing; if we are scribbling or typing hurriedly 
thinking only of a deadline, we must pause and reflect on a better approach.
Planning is that approach. Only through planning can you avoid present￾ing readers with reports that feature words, phrases, sentences, and para￾graphs scrambling chaotically in every direction. Over decades of writing, 
academically and professionally, I have created a guideline for planning my 
work. Since I haven’t seen it anywhere else, I’ll claim it as mine and call it 
“The James Ratio.” It’s simple.
THE JAMES RATIO
Of the time you have set aside – or left – to write something, allocate 
50% of that time to planning. This may seem excessive, but bear with 
me. Once we’ve studied the different tools and techniques you can exper￾iment with and choose from, you’ll see how usefully you can spend that 
50% of your time.
You then need to spend only 20% of your time writing. This leaves 30%
of your time for quality checks: spelling and grammar checks, using read￾ability statistics, reading aloud, and peer or manager review. (If you have 
dyslexia, as mentioned in Chapter 4, you can use your 30% drawing on 
assistive technology and colleague support, rather than using spelling and 
grammar checks.1)102 Radical Reporting
The James Ratio – 50/20/30 – is something I’ve applied for several decades 
now, to school work, university essays, doctoral exams, and written assign￾ments and portfolios for professional qualifications. In the workplace, I’ve 
found it valuable for everything: complex emails, letters to customers, busi￾ness cases, and, yes, reports. It simply works. Emma Smith of Vodafone sees 
preparation as crucial to effective communication – bringing a presentation 
or paper to life for the reader. “Underpinning this is preparation. Rarely do 
well-prepared communications land badly.”
Let me give you an example of one client who was extremely doubtful 
about my ratio. It was a small team of experienced and talented copywriters 
who had to produce website copy to tight deadlines daily. A typical produc￾tion cycle would last as little as 30 minutes. Within less than half an hour of 
receiving the brief from the marketing team, the copywriting team of five 
would have to produce a clean piece of copy to appear immediately on the 
company’s website.
The team worked swiftly and well, but always under pressure. Individual 
team members would get to work directly on copy for 15–20 minutes, 
then submit it to marketing for review. They would then have to make 
any required changes in as little as two or three minutes before submit￾ting the final version for publication. Sometimes the marketing team 
would make changes themselves to save time, which demoralized the 
copywriting team. (It also led to the marketing team occasionally intro￾ducing typos, which then appeared on the company’s website.) It was 
stressful.
When I introduced the copywriters to the concept of 50/20/30, they were 
stunned. One of them said, “OK, but if we receive a brief at 10:00am, we 
have to submit copy at 10:25 at the latest for publication at 10:30. Your 
ratio means we spend at ten to twelve minutes planning the content, five 
writing, maybe seven minutes reviewing. Can that work?”
I suggested they spend ten minutes planning, five writing, and five on peer 
review – a novelty for them. They could then aim to submit their copy to 
marketing at the 20-minute mark. They were still doubtful but promised to 
try it.
The following week, they started this process Monday morning. The ben￾efits appeared within days: the team found the process smoother and less 
stressful. The marketing team requested fewer changes, if any. And a third 
benefit – discovered only weeks later – was that the process worked even 
when the team was understaffed. On one day, the manager told me, one 
member of staff was on holiday, another ill, and a third had to leave early 
to attend to his ill child. The remaining members of staff stuck to the new 
process – 50/20/30 – which helped them avoid panic, maintain focus, and 
deliver good copy.
I shared three techniques for organizing thoughts – planning – to this 
team, although there’s one they preferred. The following sections explain all Planning 103
three and show how you can use them in different situations, no matter 
what kind of writing you do.
MIND-MAPPING
You may have learned how to mind map, and there are many useful 
resources. At its simplest, it’s using shapes and possibly colors to represent 
thoughts, themes, and facts on a page. You can certainly use software to 
create mind maps, but there’s nothing wrong with paper and pens – the 
old-fashioned way.
The point of a mind map is to spare you the confusion and pain associ￾ated with “brain dumping.” I’ve met hundreds of people whose first step, 
when faced with a big report and looming deadline, is to “brain dump” – to 
spill onto the page every single fact and passing thought associated with the 
topic they can think of. This leads to one of two situations. The first harks 
back to the Henry Rollins quote: the report merely documents words fleeing 
the writer’s head. The writer, losing focus, energy, and confidence, is then 
likely to give the draft report to a colleague to review. If this happens, the 
reviewer is likely to be as confused as the writer, and much more irritated. 
None of this produces good team morale or efficiency, let alone a readable 
report.
The second and less likely situation is that the writer, having committed 
the “brain dump,” has the awareness to edit their own work. This is likely 
to involve removing 80–90% of what they’ve written and radically restruc￾turing the rest. This is tedious, inefficient, and, again, demoralizing.
A mind map is the perfect tool for you to dump your brain. In a mind 
map – especially a hand-written one – you can be as confused, messy, and 
contradictory as you like. The point of the mind map is to thrash out all the 
elements of the topic you’re working on. Every aspect, angle, and ramifica￾tion can go in there. You can scrawl words, images, within shapes, with 
connecting lines, arrows, and question marks. It can be a work in progress, 
reflecting your own constantly evolving understanding of a topic.
In two separate cases, I worked with cybersecurity teams who had never 
mind-mapped before. This was part of training to help the teams – includ￾ing, in one, the most senior IT leaders in the organization – communicate 
more clearly. The team members focused on different, highly specialized 
aspects of cybersecurity, and their resulting reports often duplicated infor￾mation while overlooking common points. Mind-mapping, I thought, would 
help, and we had flipcharts and colored markers ready.
As usual in my training courses, I briefly showed attendees how to mind￾map, divided them into two groups, and invited them to create two distinct 
mind maps, each on a different cybersecurity topic. When the time for the 
exercise was nearly up, I saw that each group had used at least two flipchart 
pages, and they were frenziedly filling more. In one case, the head of 104 Radical Reporting
department, who was there and working with one group, said the activity 
was proving so useful that they should continue. I quickly revised my after￾noon training plan and timings, and left them to it.
After 45 minutes, the groups brought their pages to the large board-style 
table we were all seated around. They placed their pages next to each other 
and taped them all together to create a monster mind map three pages 
across and two down. They then started drawing arrows among common 
themes, grouping points together within circles or rectangles, and adding 
more detail.
You’ll appreciate they enjoyed the exercise. They proudly transported 
their monster mind map to their shared office and stuck it to the wall. Over 
the next months, it acquired further notes, shapes, and insights.
Both teams spent much longer on an exercise I’d originally planned 20 
minutes for. What was the benefit? The immediate return on investment 
appeared during the session itself. In both cases, they realized that collec￾tively they had been producing 10 to 12 reports a month, for different audi￾ences. The mind map helped them see where these different audiences 
wanted broadly similar information – so the team reduced the number of 
reports immediately. This led to greater efficiency in producing the reports, 
and greater consistency across them. No longer would people receive three, 
four, or five reports on cybersecurity and have to ask what the slight differ￾ences among them meant. The data and messages were more coherent.
The less immediate return on investment was greater awareness of what 
different team members were doing. Although they all belonged to one main 
team, their specialized focus meant they often forgot or ignored relevant 
information outside their smaller teams. The mind-mapping exercise helped 
them realize how they could share, use, and expand on information across 
teams much more effectively. This in turn helped them produce fewer but 
more useful reports.
Let’s return to the point about numbers and types of reports. If you are in 
a team or department that produces numerous reports to different audi￾ences on the same topic (enterprise risk management or IT security, for 
example), this kind of exercise could be useful. If your team mind maps all 
the different reports and briefings, it’s easier to see where you can stream￾line your work. If you can then reduce the number of reports you have to 
provide, but increase their quality, that alone would justify the time spent 
mind-mapping.
Even if you are producing only one report, consider the requirements of 
the different readers, both internal and external. A mind map can help with 
this, allowing you to sketch out readers as disparate as operational manag￾ers, board members, regulators, and even members of the public (for public￾sector organizations who must publish reports or respond to 
freedom-of-information requests). Gathering all these groups, their expecta￾tions, and needs on one page can help you see where you can group together 
information relevant to all of them, which reduces repetition in your report. Planning 105
It will also help reassure you that you are factoring in the relevant industry 
standards for reporting.
Emma Smith lists the various sources of information and guidance her 
teams use for reporting.
For reporting we typically don’t follow a framework. We use ISO and 
our own risk assessment behind our control framework. We have used 
NACD and other research into board reporting. Regular reporting fol￾lows a method I have used for some time: threat and risk (internal and 
external), where are we against where we want to be, how does that 
compare with other companies, and the plans to improve. We have key 
risk indicator metrics that measure the controls most crucial to mitigat￾ing risk. I collaborate with peers through industry forums (I4, ESAF, 
ACF, etc.) and we also commission our own benchmarking.
This list alone shows how much teams can benefit from a graphic rep￾resentation of everything feeding into their reporting.
Another way in which mind maps can help plan is with complex projects 
requiring different communications. The example below comes from a 
coaching client, a senior financial crime manager, who led a team producing 
a new fraud leaflet. The mind map allowed her to see more clearly not only 
the readers but indeed the whole project.106 Radical Reporting
Whenever you face a complex project or report, mind-mapping can help 
spread out all the information at a glance. Having said that, many people 
don’t take naturally to mind-mapping – I’m one of them. I instinctively pre￾fer more ordered and linear ways of organizing my thoughts, and I’ll share 
them with you shortly.
However, there is an advantage to mind-mapping if it’s outside your com￾fort zone: you see things differently. Often when we do what is habitual and 
familiar, we risk skimming over information or making assumptions. By 
forcing ourselves to try a different approach, we force our brains to work 
differently. It can be uncomfortable, but extremely useful. As I said, I’m not 
a natural mind mapper, but when I’ve used it, I’ve benefited greatly.
Initially, I used mind maps for findings, and Chapter 7 will share that 
technique. But over the years, I’ve learned from students across the world – 
in France, Scotland, and Singapore, to name but three places – how they use 
mind maps to produce better-written communications. I’ve also worked 
closely with heads of internal audit and risk on mind-mapping the risks fac￾ing their organizations. They can then produce relevant, coherent annual or 
other regular plans for the board and senior committees to scrutinize.
Let’s look at how this technique can help you organize your thinking at 
all levels, using a (fictitious) UK food manufacturer as our case study. In the 
first mind map, we see a few of the areas of internal and external risk facing 
this manufacturer. Whether you’re in audit, risk, compliance, or IT security, 
you’ll recognize these risks and be able to add many more, as well as see 
how this could help create a comprehensive yet focused operational plan.Planning 107
Now let’s imagine you’re an internal auditor reviewing contract manage￾ment for that same UK food manufacturer. You’ll have seen from the high￾level mind map above that contracts feature, so it’s important to assess the 
controls in place to mitigate contracts-related risks. You might come up 
with another high-level mind map, this time setting out the risks specific to 
contract management. From this mind map, you could create terms of refer￾ence, risk assessment documents, and other written communications essen￾tial to your engagement.
The third mind map is inspired by an internal auditor I met in Singapore, 
where high-school students learn mind-mapping as an essential study skill. 
This internal auditor explained that she uses mind maps to plan her testing 
for each engagement. This was new to me, so I asked her to tell me more. 
Apparently, she spends two to three hours before every audit mind-mapping 
numerous elements: risks, controls, expected statistical sampling methodol￾ogy, existing data she can rely on rather than duplicate, and even external 
recipients of her test results.
What she meant by this was that, rather than planning to test only what 
was necessary for the immediate audit, she checked whether other parties 
required test data in the coming 6–12 weeks. Her reasoning was that if, for 
example, the risk function was requiring similar data in two months’ time, 
why not find out their requirements now and share the results, rather than 
re-perform the testing? If the external auditors are planning to check the 
Assurance engagement: contract 
management (UK food manufacturer 
with global market and clients)
Financial risks
Health and safety risks
Regulatory and legal risks
Reputational risks
Suppliers failing to meet standards of ethics and 
behavior (with own staff, suppliers, community or 
customers
Corrupt practices (internally or at suppliers)
CSR and environmental
IT security – cloud, GDPR and 
national/regional equivalents
Failure to deliver to customers – bad press 
and criticism on social media
Unsuitable suppliers – unable to meet standards or 
provide value for money
Contingency – both with back-up suppliers, and requiring 
suppliers to have contingency plans (warehousing, geopolitical 
crises, natural disasters, protests)
Financial impacts – taxation regimes,ccurrency 
fluctuations, tariffs and duties, fines, labor costs
Failure to deliver to customers – lost sales revenue 
Staff wellbeing (working hours, protective 
equipment)
Unsafe manufacturing equipment
Failure to adhere to relevant laws and 
regulations
IT security – cloud, GDPR and 
national/regional equivalents
Failure to deliver to customers – demands for 
compensation, possible lawsuits108 Radical Reporting
same controls but using slightly different criteria – again, find out their 
requirements and factor them into the same batch of testing. Internal and 
external assurance functions – internal audit, risk, compliance, external audit, 
and even regulators – often place reliance on each other’s work (after assess￾ing it’s to the required standard). It therefore makes sense to find out where 
there are similar requirements so as to avoid duplicating someone else’s work 
unnecessarily, or repeating work you’ve done recently. The mind map below 
shows how that fictitious internal auditor reviewing contract management 
can plan testing – what to test, what to rely on (and question), and for whom.
As with the cybersecurity teams with their monster mind maps, we have 
to ask about return on investment. Drawing shapes is all very amusing, but 
what is the tangible benefit? The Singaporean internal auditor quantified it 
starkly: “For every two to three hours I spend mind-mapping, I save myself 
two to three days of testing.”
How does this aid reporting? First, anything that makes you work more 
effectively and efficiently frees up your time and energy, which you’ll need 
to document your work. Second, reports will be more powerful if they com￾municate a coherent message. Rather than testing and reporting piecemeal, 
you can produce reports that reassure boards and regulators that you have 
considered “the big picture.” Taking into account broader considerations 
such as organizational risk appetite, regulatory requirements, industry stan￾dards, and relevant legislation makes reports compelling calls to action, 
rather than a list of apparently low-level tasks.
Testing –
review 
supplier 
contracts
Can 
place 
reliance 
on:
Must 
provide 
assurance 
to:
External 
audit’s 
confirmation 
of group org 
charts and 
their place in 
governance
First-line risk 
team’s 
2019-20 
work on 
warehouse 
capacity 
Compliance’s 
review of 
sample of 
materials 
suppliers 
against group 
procurement 
standards for 
fair practice 
in bidding 
process 
Group Risk’s recent 
review of health 
and safety 
standards for 
carriers/hauliers 
(promptedby Brexit 
delay headlines)
Environmental 
regulator 
requires reports 
this quarter
Board and 
senior 
management 
that controls in 
place and 
effective
Is this work still 
relevant? Were 
results affected by 
Brexit stockpiling or 
Covid panic-buying?
How many 
samples? What 
were the criteria? 
National or 
international 
standards? Did they 
include anti-bribery 
and corruption 
legislation?
Org charts for group 
procurement, which controls 
contracts (simpler than if 
devolved to individual divisions)
JDs for contracts 
team
Group 
procurement 
standards
Legal guidance on 
and review of 
contracts Rightto audit
included in all 
contracts? Has it 
been exercised?
Do all contracts include 
clear statements of 
standards 
(environmental, social, IT, 
legal) suppliers are 
meant to adhere to? Do 
contracts refer to all 
relevant jursidictions?
Governance
Sample of contracts 
to review – suppliers 
of raw materials, 
warehouse services, 
carriers/hauliersPlanning 109
After all, what we call internal and external assurance functions must 
perform many of the same tasks for the same reasons – but in slightly differ￾ent ways. Mark Carawan of New York University has compelling insights 
into this dynamic. He’s seen his fair share of reports, and knows better than 
most how many rivers of text must join together to produce a flow of useful 
information!
To take one example, Sarbanes–Oxley legislation affected how different 
assurance functions operated as well as what they had to report.
For US SEC listed companies, the requirements for Sarbanes–Oxley 
(SOX) compliance and the formation of the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board had a profound impact on the external auditing pro￾fession and the roles performed by external auditors. Likewise, many 
SEC-listed companies drew upon the resources and skills of the internal 
auditors within their organizations to undertake work to assist in deal￾ing with SOX, potentially diverting and diluting the risk-based internal 
audit roles within the organization. SOX likewise expanded the respon￾sibilities of the compliance officers in such companies. So, in one piece 
of legislation, each profession was affected in different ways – impacting 
how each role interacts with the other two: from degrees of reliance (or 
potentially none at all), to the nature and character of co-ordination, 
collaboration, and communication.
Although Carawan describes a complex situation clearly, we can see how 
factoring these different elements into a report would be daunting. Mind 
maps can thus help clarify all the elements, sub-elements, and the numerous 
relationships among all of them. Think of it this way: if a board member 
asked you to produce a brief report about a topic as complex as this, you’d 
probably struggle to draft something coherent directly on the page. A mind 
map, though, would help you at least organize your thoughts before decid￾ing what to write.
Louise McKay, quoted in previous chapters, is articulate on how moving 
from one specialist area to another requires a fresh perspective. As she says,
internal audit reporting tends to focus on a much narrower area than 
risk reporting. Internal audit work usually focuses on something quite 
specific – a product, process or theme – whereas our risk reporting 
focuses on risk categories which apply across most or all areas of our 
organization. The challenge is to assimilate multiple data points to form 
an overall conclusion. That can be really tough, not least because there’s 
often a degree of subjectivity and sometimes different data points tell 
you a different story! We also provide a view on the risk outlook for the 
organizations which is a key difference from audit reporting.
If you, too, need to have a broader perspective across your organization, a 
mind map will help you. Sketching out different areas, different risks, and 110 Radical Reporting
different data points will almost always make it easier to analyze – and to 
produce a clear, coherent, meaningful report.
OUTLINES
You may heave a sigh of relief at this point. If you remember outlines from 
middle or high school, you’ll recall how structured and linear they are – the 
opposite of mind maps. For those of us with a more analytical, less creative 
bent, outlines come naturally. Many people who’ve never encountered them 
before embrace the logical progression of a classic linear outline.
An outline is simply a way of organizing your thoughts and data hierar￾chically. In Chapter 1, I quoted a German banker who said that his UK 
colleagues seemed to write “thought and word salads,” whether in emails, 
briefings, or reports. This was almost entirely due to differences in educa￾tion: whereas teaching children to use outlines is standard in most western 
schools, this is generally not the case in the UK and the Republic of 
Ireland.2 The result is people learning far too late – if at all – one of the 
best techniques for organizing and ordering thoughts and facts before 
writing in earnest.
If you’ve never produced an outline before, there are plenty of resources 
available, especially online. The excellent Capital Community College 
Guide to Grammar and Writing has a page on outlining, as well as one on 
mind-mapping, which it refers to as “clustering”.3 There’s even an outline 
function in Microsoft Word, although it’s almost always better to write 
your own.
In a classic linear outline, for a school essay, for instance, you’d organize 
your research and insights hierarchically. You would represent the hierarchy 
using a combination of Roman numerals, capital letters, Arabic numerals, 
and lower-case letters, depending on how many levels or layers of informa￾tion you go into within each section.
At the most basic level, an outline looks like this:
I. Introduction
A.
B.
C.
II. First point
A.
B.
C.
III. Second point
A.
B.
C.Planning 111
IV. Third point
A.
B.
C.
V. Conclusion
A.
B.
C.
One important principle when developing an outline is that if you have only 
one sub-section under each main heading, it may not be able to stand on its 
own. So, taking the example above, if we have:
I. Introduction
A.
B.
C.
II. First point
A.
B.
C.
III. Second point
A.
IV. Third point
A.
V. Conclusion
A.
B.
C.
This would suggest that the second and third points are weaker than the 
first. Maybe there is less evidence for them; maybe they fall into different 
categories. If this is the case, analyze why your outline appears unbalanced. 
Chances are you will realize how you can strengthen the weaker points, or 
discard them altogether.
I’ve used introduction and conclusion to reflect typical essay content. In a 
report, however, you would probably start with the executive summary, and 
the final element would depend on your report. In some teams, the recom￾mendations or next steps might appear here. In others, appendices will close 
the report outline.
Let’s look at turning a mind map above into an outline. If we look at the 
first mind map – the one about the fraud leaflet project – we can immedi￾ately see distinct main points. So a first outline may look like this:112 Radical Reporting
I. Fraud leaflet project
A. Audience includes internal and external readers
B. Requires oversight from various internal teams
C. Production (including timescales and resources)
II. Audience
A. Customers
B. Firms
C. Advisors
D. Staff
E. Oversight
F. Second line of defense (risk)
G.Governance groups
H. Head of CCT
I. Channel
J. Comms team
III. Production
A. Timescales – due by end of Q2 (time challenges?)
1. Production stages and assignments
a. Wording – CCT Team
b. Design – Comms
c. Publication – Comms
d. Staff involvement – “me” + another team member
2. Resources
a. Webinars
b. Leaflets
c. Lender info
You could then develop such an outline further, writing a sentence or two 
for each element. This is particularly helpful when you dread writing and 
will do anything to avoid beginning. If you say to yourself, “I’m just going 
to start scribbling a mind map, then an outline,” you’ll have started the most 
important part. Once you’ve done that, writing is much easier – you simply 
start at the beginning, go stage by stage through every element until the 
end, with greater focus and confidence. Because you have already thought 
through what belongs in your report and in which order, you will write less 
but say more. Your report will include what is not only true but also rele￾vant, as the outline reduces the temptation of including random facts and 
observations. This is why if you spend half your time planning, you drasti￾cally reduce the time spent writing.
In Chapter 8, you’ll see a more developed outline, reflecting the content 
readers will find most useful in a typical report. Don’t skip to it now, 
though – there’s more work to do between now and then, so that you can 
better appreciate and use the “full” outline.
I first learned to use an outline when I was 12 or 13. At that time, and for 
several years afterward, it was common practice for teachers to assign an Planning 113
essay due several days later, and to require an outline partway through. For 
example, if the teacher told the class Monday their essays would be due the 
following Monday, he or she would ask to see a detailed outline by 
Wednesday. This then allowed the teacher to check that students had under￾stood the topic and were making progress in their research, analysis, and 
thinking. More importantly, if a student hadn’t understood the assignment, 
or had veered off on a tangent, it was easier for the teacher to identify the 
error in a one-page outline, thereby allowing the student time to correct 
course. This reflects the James Ratio – half the time allotted to the assign￾ment was spent on the outline, with the remainder on writing, reviewing, 
and editing.
Decades later, I discovered how useful outlines could be throughout 
research, an investigation, or audit fieldwork. They provide a handy sum￾mary of key points, ordered hierarchically, to discuss with colleagues or 
managers. Again, if there are any misunderstandings or disagreements, it’s 
far easier to correct an outline than to redraft a 10-page or longer report. It’s 
also less stressful, as changes take place well ahead of reporting deadlines. A 
crucial point to remember is one made by David Foster Wallace, speaking 
about argumentation. Since this term refers to making a case using logical 
reasoning and supporting evidence, it includes reporting. “If you couldn’t, if 
forced, put it into an outline form, you’re in trouble.”4
Another advantage I discovered accidentally. Once, during a high-profile 
internal audit, I was preparing for the first regular “checkpoint” meeting 
with the head of the area being audited. (Other teams may call these meet￾ings “tollgates,” or yet different terms.) This person had not experienced 
risk-based internal auditing and associated an audit with the purely 
accountancy-based work he’d observed many years before. Since this area 
hadn’t been audited in over ten years, there was apprehension about what 
we might find, and this senior manager was both nervous and defensive. 
This in turn made me slightly nervous about how the first meeting would 
go, so I organized my thoughts in a simple, handwritten outline. This was 
more of an aide-mémoire for my use, so I didn’t bother to type it up or 
make it look formal.
When the meeting began, the head of the area was sitting stiffly across 
from me, behind his imposing desk. I took out my handwritten outline and 
mentioned that this was simply some notes I’d made about what the testing 
showed to date. To my amazement, he swung his chair around the table to 
sit next to me and started poring over the outline. A former academic, he 
probably immediately recognized the structure. The fact it was handwritten 
made him relax – after all, it wasn’t a formal document to which he’d have 
to respond.
We then proceeded to have one of the most open and fruitful conversa￾tions I’ve ever had with an audit client. Studying the outline, he suggested 
grouping two distinct points together, as he felt they shared a root cause. 
This then prompted a discussion about underlying problems with IT 114 Radical Reporting
systems, and how it was affecting operations across the organization – use￾ful information for anyone to have. Most startlingly, he suggested that my 
third point was the most important one. He explained his thinking, sharing 
frankly with me why he felt it posed the greatest risk to his area.
You can imagine how surprised I was that a simple (handwritten) outline 
had opened the floodgates to so much useful information. What’s more, 
this person, who had previously been defensive and closed, showed himself 
willing to be frank and transparent, including about topics I hadn’t even 
suspected.
Over the following weeks, I used the same technique on other occasions. 
Each time, the outline prompted greater openness, more information-shar￾ing, and useful insights. It also helped me gradually develop, outline by out￾line, what would eventually become the draft report. Because I had been 
regularly discussing the outlines in their various versions with the head of 
the area, there were no surprises by the time the draft report came out. I had 
been able to raise sensitive topics, seek his input, and craft clear, accurate 
statements of the problems the area faced.
It was a far cry from the typical experience of having a final meeting 
(whether you call it “close-out,” “end-of-fieldwork,” “concluding,” or 
something else). In these meetings, it’s common for the auditors or inves￾tigators to discuss what they have found, even to present a few bullet 
points on slides. Typically, everyone agrees enthusiastically to what 
they’ve said – and then expresses shock and dismay when they see the 
report, putting into writing what everyone agreed verbally. You can feel 
impatience with this response – after all, most teams issue written reports. 
How on earth did the clients, team being audited, or area under review 
think we would convey our findings – through cave painting, or interpre￾tive dance?
But this overlooks the human element. Seeing something written down, 
whether a report suggesting improvements, a disappointing exam grade, or 
a medical diagnosis, often comes as a shock. As long as things remain 
unwritten, we can kid ourselves that they may change, or the severity of the 
message may lessen. Once we see the evidence on paper (or screen), however, 
denial is difficult, and defensiveness common.
So outlines can improve not only how you organize your thoughts, but 
also how you communicate with colleagues and clients before drafting a 
report. It can make much easier the process of gathering and analyzing 
information, and gaining consensus.
This is why I’ve used handwritten outlines ever since. The astonishing 
thing is that not once has an audit client reacted badly to it. Now, certain 
cultures – organizational and other – may balk at seeing anything handwrit￾ten. But my experience is that this has simply communicated to the client, 
“Look, this is just you and me. I’m sharing my thoughts with you, and they 
reflect what the current fieldwork results tell me. What do you think? What’s 
missing? What doesn’t look right? What seems like an anomaly?” Every Planning 115
time, the audit client has entered into the discussion in a spirit of openness 
and cooperation. I hope you experience this, too.
The last point I want to make about outlines is my emphasis on writing 
them by hand. There may be many excellent reasons why you won’t want to 
do this, or share the result with clients. Perhaps you have dyslexia, and writ￾ing is difficult enough, or difficulties physically using pen and paper. Maybe, 
as mentioned earlier, clients will respond badly to the sight of a handwritten 
document.
However, if possible, try writing by hand at least occasionally, even if only 
for your own benefit. The process of writing by hand is physically and men￾tally different from typing, as the novelist Fay Weldon advises. “Develop the 
manual techniques of writing,” she writes, “so that as the mind works the 
hand moves.”5 This may seem unnecessarily old-fashioned to you, even 
alien, but I strongly recommend it. As well as learning how your brain works 
differently when writing and when typing – much as mind-mapping may 
shift your perspective – you’ll also hone the skill.
Nicholas Carr’s book The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our 
Brains is excellent on the different ways in which we read and process infor￾mation.6 You don’t have to be a technophobe to be aware that, as life 
becomes ever more automated, our conscious and unconscious habits 
change. As a member of the pre-computing generation, I reached voting age 
before ever using a computer to write an essay or article. The habit of using 
keyboards, tablets, and smart devices has changed the way I think and cer￾tainly write. This is why I try to write mind maps, outlines, and notes by 
hand regularly. If we keep practicing older tools and techniques, we will be 
able to retain them, to have a choice, and to not be dependent on only one 
mode of thinking or writing.
Mini-outlines
These are exactly what they sound like – a rapid-fire way to seize the key 
elements of what you need to communicate. Some might say they’re not 
even outlines, as there’s little hierarchy other than listing items in order 
of importance. It’s simply a matter of challenging yourself to summa￾rize your investigation, proposal, or update in no more than six bulleted 
items.
These are more useful for shorter documents: mini-reports, interim memos 
or briefings, even emails. I’ve used them for ad hoc investigations when a site 
incident required a speedy report within days. After gathering information 
from sources of varying insight and reliability, I’d find it best to sit down and 
write (again, by hand), what I knew in six points. For example, if the board 
asked you to report on a major IT failure, the high-level mini-outline might 
look like this:116 Radical Reporting
1. The X server failed last night.
2. We’ve lost £15 million in transactions as a result.
3. If we don’t repair or replace within X days, we’ll lose another £50 
million.
4. This is the quickest and best way to replace it.
5. This is the main objection to replacing it. [Note – this will usually 
come from the senior manager who hasn’t repaired or replaced the 
server in years and is trying to block anything that makes his or her 
negligence clear.]
6. This is why we should ignore this objection.
Would your final report to the board look like this? Of course not – but 
sketching out in a few lines the main, unavoidable points to include will 
give you the spine of your report. You can then flesh out where necessary, 
without digressing or going into unnecessary detail.
Mini-outlines are also excellent for important emails. If you find that 
you are receiving late, inaccurate, or no responses to emails you send, con￾sider using mini-outlines. I used to work with a client’s actuarial and IT 
teams to produce a monthly newsletter about the EU financial directive 
Solvency II. Thrilling stuff! This meant extracting regular updates from 
people not known for their keenness to interact with others. The internal 
communications team had previously written the newsletters and had had 
difficulty getting the right information in good time from relevant experts. 
What they received was often too detailed, too technical, or not immedi￾ately relevant.
Using mini-outlines to hone my call-for-information emails helped reduce 
the time and effort everyone spent. First I created my mini-outline of infor￾mation that had to appear in the email.
1. Solvency II Newsletter Issue X [insert month and year]
2. Updates needed by [deadline date]
3. Must include information about new Solvency II-related projects or 
systems launching this month
4. Must include information about major changes or delays to existing 
Solvency II-related projects or systems
5. If no change since previous issue, please say so
6. Word limit for updates
Looking at the six items, 1 and 2 could appear in the subject heading of 
the email. This automatically reduces the amount of text in the body of the 
email. The resulting email ran like this:Planning 117
Subject: Newsletter Issue 13 – call for updates (deadline 5 August)
Hello – yes, it’s that time again. Can you please send me 250 words maximum 
by 5pm this Friday, 5th August, about progress in your area since mid-June? The 
focus should be on what changes people in the Group have seen, or will see between 
now and mid-October. Issue 12 attached for reference.
Thanks in advance. As always, please get in touch if you have any questions.
Sara
[contact details]
The result was that people responded promptly with concise, relevant 
updates. When I share this approach with training and consultancy clients, 
they are astounded by the benefits. One cybersecurity expert said she’d 
received relevant responses by her deadline for the first time ever using the 
mini-outline technique.
There are other ways of refining your approach to improve communica￾tions. You may need to occasionally call people to check their workload and 
let them know the email is arriving. Creating this rapport of understanding 
makes it likelier they will try to deliver what you need. If it’s impossible, 
then at least you’ll have been warned and can plan around it.
Giving people a get-out clause for 5 can also promote efficiency: “If I 
don’t hear from you by [deadline date], I’ll assume there’s no change since 
your last update.” This tells them that it’s fine to have no news, and also that 
they don’t need to go to any effort to convey this to you.
You can also invite people to tell you if they are no longer responsible for 
this information, but that’s likelier to happen when reporting takes place at 
greater intervals. Weekly or monthly updates mean your correspondents are 
likelier to inform you of any staff or remit changes.
Mini-outlines also work well for mini-reports. Many teams are moving – 
whether under the guise of “agile” methodology or prompted by changes to 
working from the Covid-19 pandemic – to shorter, sometimes one-page 
reports. And a mini-outline is perfect for working out exactly what you 
must include in that one page. If you have so little time to make an impres￾sion, you’ll want to use every word and line wisely.
Paul Breach, Head of Audit Practices and Operations, Internal Audit at 
LSEG (London Stock Exchange Group), describes how reporting practices 
have changed recently, and the results for clients.
The incremental “reporting” aspect provided auditors with the tem￾plates and expectations to discuss and report conclusions throughout 
the duration of the audit, before wrapping it all together at the end. 
This approach to communicating “as we go,” rather than waiting to the 
end, was particularly well received by stakeholders.118 Radical Reporting
If this is an approach your team would benefit from, think of how mind-map￾ping, outlines, and mini-mind maps can help you refine your thinking so as 
to present readers with something as clear, focused, and useful as it is concise.
Try all three techniques and see which works best for you and in which 
circumstances. You may find that mind-mapping is a boon during cross￾divisional reviews, or benchmarking exercises. Outlines may give you com￾fort – and your manager’s approval – before writing a report. And a 
mini-outline may help you craft emails and updates that hit the target every 
time.
A final set of planning images shows the return on investment for plan￾ning. These come from another coaching client, an IT auditor whose work 
was of the highest standard but who lacked confidence in organizing her 
thoughts. I shared these three techniques with her and asked her to try each 
for her next report. She came to the next coaching session with the news 
that she hadn’t had to write a report in the previous week. However, she was 
starting an IT integration review and had to produce terms of reference for 
it. She tried all three techniques – by hand – with the following results:
Mind map.Planning 119
Outline (in spirit if not in exact form).
Mini-outline and…???120 Radical Reporting
Yes – what is that final image, below the mini-outline? It looks like col￾umns of information, linked across the top by the big themes (governance, 
methodology, RAID, resources and training, procedures). When asked, the 
client explained that once she’d started experimenting with the different 
techniques, her brain started going into overdrive, thinking of all the differ￾ent aspects of this work and how she could group them. So she came up 
with these four rather than three representations of what she would have to 
consider in her terms of reference.
Then came the “So what?” moment: what was the return on investment? 
Well, she said, she spent 45 minutes at home one evening scribbling away 
happily. The next morning, she went into the office and by 10:00 a.m. had 
produced not only the review terms of reference, but also her risk and con￾trol assessment document. By 11:00 a.m. her line manager had signed off 
both, perfectly happy.
Using these techniques not only saved her time, but also pain. For the first 
time, she went into the office without dreading the moment she would face 
a blank page or screen and start writing. She had done the hard part – the 
rigorous analysis and organization of her information – and the next morn￾ing was eager to document her plans and insights.
She was ready to write.
I hope this chapter has given you plenty of examples to start experiment￾ing. Each technique can be used for many different purposes. Mind-mapping 
can produce annual plans; investigation, review, or testing plans; terms of 
reference; risk and control documents; and, as you’ll see in Chapter 7, 
insights into root cause.
Outlines can be aides-mémoires for regular meetings, as well as a useful 
tool to agree report content with managers and other reviewers. Once 
you’ve written an outline, the writing “proper” comes much more easily. 
Finally, the mini-outline of six bullet points will help you with emails, 
interim reports, briefings, and memos.
You may find that you feel much happier and more confident when writ￾ing once you have your preferred planning tool or technique. It’s not surpris￾ing – after all, you wouldn’t build a house without having architectural 
blueprints first, would you? Moreover, any task is easier when you know 
exactly what your next step is – writing is no different, as even Ernest 
Hemingway said. “I always worked until I had something done and I always 
stopped when I knew what was going to happen next. That way I could be 
sure of going on the next day.”7
At this point, some of you may be thinking of Chapter 4, which discussed 
the role of LLMs in drafting text. Why not use software to brainstorm, to 
organize thoughts before writing? There is of course no reason not to – pro￾vided you keep in mind the security and copyright elements mentioned ear￾lier, and maintain control of the inputs and outputs.8Planning 121
For Alex Psarras, Associate Director, Internal Audit and Financial 
Advisory at Protiviti UK, LLMs offer tremendous benefits to those working 
in audit, risk, compliance and IT security – who must also be cognizant of 
the risks. 
For me, the obvious opportunity is to allow assurance professionals to 
ingest large volumes of information, to get quicker insights or generate 
reporting. This could be automating manual activities like summarising 
multiple documents, emails or chat threads to get to the key points, 
translating technical documentation, diagrams or text in foreign lan￾guages into plain English, providing real-time meeting feedback, and 
creating the first draft of a report based on all information known so 
far.
However, he also points to downsides – the greatest risks being “biases in 
the training data, the overreliance on LLMs without human oversight; and 
the potential for misinformation and hallucinations,” as mentioned 
previously.9
Alexander Rühle agrees with Psarras on the efficiency LLMs can bring to 
an organization using them thoughtfully. Not only can they help us “get rid 
of low-level work, unloved and of no value in times of ever-increasing docu￾mentation requirements,” they can change functions fundamentally, and for 
the better. From an internal audit perspective, he writes, 
I claim that AI is the greatest opportunity for us to move towards trans￾formative auditing. What is necessary? The new standards require inter￾nal audit governance changes. That is an opportunity to rethink the 
company-specific purpose based on internal audit’s purpose, to define 
the how and what – the strategy.
Returning to the James Ratio, we have covered the 50% of the time spent 
on planning, reducing writing to 20%. Chapter 4 covered the ABCs and 
other ways to make what you write clear, concise, and meaningful. The 
remaining 30% is for review – reviewing your own work, and having others 
review it. We’ve already mentioned spelling and grammar checks, readabil￾ity statistics, and reading out loud. Chapter 9 will focus on the actual review 
process in teams, and how to make both peer review and manager review 
more positive and productive.
In the next chapter, we will move from planning to structure. Once you 
have gathered and ordered your information and insights, it’s much easier to 
structure reports. However, Chapter 6 will help you understand traditional 
report structure, the pros and cons of standard templates, and the usefulness 
(or otherwise) of automated reporting.122 Radical Reporting
ACTIVITIES
• Start with a mini-outline. Think of an important email you sent recently, 
but don’t look at it. From memory alone, write a mini-outline – no more 
than six bullet points, each one no longer than a sentence. Now com￾pare it to the email you actually sent. What are the differences? Was 
your email longer or shorter? Did it put the most important information 
first, or bury it in detail? Most importantly, did you get the answers you 
needed to your email on time? If not, maybe your readers got lost.
• Once you are confident in your own ability to create outline, ask an LLM 
to create one for a particular topic. Make sure you don’t use any organ￾ization- or person-specific data in the prompt, though. For example, you 
could ask “Please create an outline for testing outward payments in a 
manufacturing company,” or “Please write an outline of how I can check 
basic cybersecurity controls in an insurance company.”
• Mind map a current project – this can be an upcoming investigation or 
review, or a piece of research for work or study. What connections have 
appeared using the mind map? Do some aspects of the project or topic 
have more links than others? Are there any gaps you hadn’t realized?
• When it’s time for you to prepare writing up your project, select the 
most relevant parts of the mind map and create an outline from them. 
Share it with your manager, reviewer, or supervisor. Are you on the right 
track and ready to start writing? Or do you need to consider some 
elements further?
SUMMARY
• “If I had five minutes to chop down a tree, I’d spend three minutes sharp￾ening my axe.” (attrib. Abraham Lincoln)
• The more you plan, the less – but better – you will write. Try the James 
Ratio: 50% of your report-writing time on planning, 20% on writing, and 
30% on quality checks.
• Rigorously thinking through all the elements of your topic will enable 
you to see the complexities, connections, and gaps more clearly. You can 
then develop annual plans, terms of reference, research papers, reports, 
and more with confidence.Planning 123
NOTES
1 There are websites in both North America and the UK, as well as other coun￾tries, offering support and advice for people with dyslexia. These include The 
International Dyslexia Foundation (https://dyslexiaida.org/), The American 
Dyslexia Association www.dyslexia.me/), Dyslexia Canada (www.dyslexiacan￾ada.org/), The British Dyslexia Association (www.bdadyslexia.org.uk/), Dyslexia 
UK (www.dyslexia.uk.com/), and The Dyslexia Association (www.dyslexia.uk.
net/).
2 George Orwell would likely have attributed this to what he called “the lack of 
philosophical faculty, the absence in nearly all Englishmen of any need for an 
ordered system of thought or even for the use of logic.” “The Lion and The 
Unicorn: Socialism and the English Genius,” Why I Write (London: Penguin 
Books, 2004), 11–94.
3 Capital Community College Guide to Grammar and Writing, www.guidetogram￾mar.org/grammar/composition/brainstorm_outline.htm and www.guidetogram￾mar.org/grammar/composition/brainstorm_clustering.htm.
4 Garner, Quack This Way, 78.
5 Letters to Alice on First Reading Jane Austen (New York: Carroll & Graf 
Publishers, Inc., 1990), 30.
6 London: W. W. Norton & Company, 2011.
7 A Moveable Feast. The Restored Edition (London: Arrow Books, 2010), 22.
8 For a practical demonstration, see Jon Taber, Abbas Al Lawati and Alex Rusate, 
“The Softball, The Hardball, and the Curveball,” Audit 15 FUN podcast, January 
24, 2024. https://jontaber.substack.com/p/the-softball-the-hardball-and-the
9 See also www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/oct/10/amazon-hiring-ai￾gender-bias-recruiting-engine
• Outlines – such as those learned in school – have much to offer in the 
workplace. Whether you are gathering your thoughts for a client meeting, 
sketching out the order of a draft report, or even planning an important 
email, outlines help you order the main points and supporting evidence 
logically. As with drafting, judicious use of LLMs can help create an initial 
outline for you to review and develop further.
• The more you experiment with different planning tools and techniques, 
the greater your flexibility. They will help you think differently about the 
information you want to convey, and consider how to appeal to a wide 
range of readers, whether in one report or several.124 DOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-8 
Chapter 6
Structure and layout
In the previous chapter, we laid some of the groundwork for this one. Once 
you have carefully thought through your topic, research, and insights, and 
organized them in a planning document, it’s much easier to structure your 
report logically.
However, do you even need to produce a report? Perhaps this is the most 
radical idea of all – a book about reporting that questions reports. It’s a 
question worth asking, though – think of how many different techniques 
and media are available to you, and how your readers access information. 
They probably use screens, but this doesn’t mean continuing to produce 
Word documents for them to scroll though. They may prefer a presentation, 
or video, or a simple email – we’ll cover all these possibilities in this chapter. 
Whatever medium (or media) you use, though, you must have a logical, 
reader-friendly structure and layout.
At this point, you may be thinking of standard templates you must use in 
the workplace, and we’ll cover their pros and cons later in this chapter. For 
now, though, this chapter may help you better use your templates, or even 
suggest revising them – so it’s worth reading through.
We will start with report structure, then cover layout (the “look and feel” 
of the document on page or screen). The layout discussion will also address 
making documents accessible. By improving how they appear, you can help 
all your readers – not only those you assume will benefit. Finally, we will 
talk about templates, including automated reports. Sample templates 
throughout the chapter should prompt you to think creatively about how 
best to present your report content.
STRUCTURE
The structure of any report should be as simple as possible. However much 
information you feel you need to include, a simple structure will increase 
the chances your readers will keep reading and benefit from the detail. All 
too often, though, reports meander through not only dozens or hundreds Structure and layout 125
of pages, but numerous complex headings, sub-headings, sub-sub-headings, 
sub-sub-sub-headings…you get the idea.
The result, far from “signposting” the content clearly, has the opposite 
effect, as Steve Pressfield describes.
There’s a story about an embassy that was sent once to the ancient 
Spartans. The foreign envoys spoke for hours before the assembled cit￾izens, seeking their aid. When they had finished, the Spartans declared, 
“We can’t remember what you said at the beginning, we were confused by 
what you said in the middle, and by the end we were all sound asleep.”1
Many people think they can avoid this by just the sort of “signposting” 
mentioned above. By creating lots of headings, sub-headings, etc., through￾out the report, they hope to remind the reader of where he or she is, whether 
on page 4, 19, or 72. However, it usually doesn’t work because it doesn’t 
address the problem. Whenever I’ve asked someone why there are multiple 
levels of headings in the report, the response is always the same: “To make 
it clear to the reader what I’m saying.”
This should raise an obvious question. If you know that what you’re say￾ing isn’t clear, how will adding more text (italicized, underlined, in bold, at 
various intervals) help? The solution is to fix the writing that’s already there. 
If you find yourself in this situation, go back to the first five chapters – you 
have to start with critical thinking and plain language before thinking of 
how to present it on the page. Otherwise, you will be like someone fussing 
over the wallpaper in an unbuilt house.
There is another analogy for this tendency to use complex report struc￾tures to impose order on chaotic writing. Imagine a badly paved road, filled 
with potholes and fissures. The obvious solution is to re-pave the road, mak￾ing it fit for people to travel on safely and smoothly. However, if you believe 
the solution is to leave the road as it is, but add lots of signposts along the 
side of the road, don’t be surprised if people don’t want to travel along it! 
Similarly, a badly reasoned and written report won’t improve for being split 
into ever more sections and sub-sections.
Sawyer’s Internal Auditing advises not just clear structure, but one that 
discourages repeated content.
Poor organization of reported material is an impediment to clarity. Reports 
should flow easily from beginning to end. They should not contain closely 
related material in different sections. Many reports deal with complex 
subjects. Some report sections bear a relationship to others. To the extent 
possible, each audit report should be so organized that all the auditor has 
to say on a given subject appears in only one place in the report.2
You may write many different kinds of reports: audit, risk, regulatory, compli￾ance, or board reports; project updates; briefings or memos. Yet all will have 
one thing in common – the readers will be human, with all the limitations 126 Radical Reporting
we’ve discussed earlier. They will be tired, distracted, and under pressure from 
many fronts. So whatever kind of report you write, the structure should be 
one that leads the reader effortlessly through a coherent, compelling message.
The following structure is simple, but it’s a good place to start.
The report starts with a title, which may seem obvious. Yet I’ve been sur￾prised how many report-writers get it wrong, being either too vague 
(“Payments”) or too detailed (“Results of End-to-End Investigation into 
International Payments 1 October–31 December 2014”). Why not just say 
“International Payments Q4 2014”? We’ll cover striking the right balance 
between too little and too much detail here and in the following chapters. It 
is often the difference between keeping and losing the reader.
The executive summary – often called “summary,” “key messages,” even 
“conclusion” or other terms – comes next. Chapter 8 will cover executive 
summaries, but for now, the most important thing is that it should come 
first. Think of a newspaper article. You’ll read the headline (the title) and 
possibly a sub-headline (part of the title). The first paragraph – called the 
“lede” in US journalism – must draw the reader in. After reading that brief 
first paragraph, the reader should both understand the high-level message 
and know whether he or she wants to keep reading. The executive summary, 
whatever you label it, must fulfill the same role.
If you put your executive summary (or equivalent) at the end, readers will 
learn to skip straight to the end. If you bury the high-level message of your 
executive summary in unnecessary prefatory material, you will dilute it.
You’ll see in the graphic above a horizontal line after “executive sum￾mary.” This is because I’ve found that most people tend not to read beyond 
that point – they rightly assume that the most important information is 
there. Below the red line a crucial dynamic occurs, one that is essential for 
you to understand in order to structure your reports usefully.
Those who read beyond the executive summary will be (1) fewer and 
fewer as the report goes on, and (2) those who are most interested in the Structure and layout 127
detail. This means that by structuring your report as above – high-level mes￾sages above the red line, increasing amounts of detail below – you will meet 
a variety of readers’ needs.
Think about your readers, both internal and external, and you’ll immedi￾ately see how different they are. They have different backgrounds, educa￾tion, professional credentials and experiences, roles, priorities, and therefore 
reasons for reading your report.
The only way you can address those needs is by following this structure. 
The executive summary, as you’ll see in Chapter 8, should convey a coherent 
message that all relevant readers – no matter how diverse – will immediately 
understand.
Beyond that point, your findings or observations and recommendations 
will feature the detail that specialist readers need and want. By including 
detail later in the report, you provide it while not letting it clutter the high￾level executive summary, which risks distracting or boring the majority of 
readers. The next chapter will cover findings and observations, different 
approaches to writing them, and pitfalls to avoid. After all, if you don’t have 
any individual points to communicate, you don’t have anything to report.
Ara Chalabyan is President of IIA Armenia and the former chief audit 
executive of the Central Bank of Armenia. He is also a consultant on inter￾nal audit to the International Monetary Fund, as well as a lecturer in finance 
and auditing at the American University of Armenia. Previously an internal 
auditor, he sees reports from both sides – as a writer and as a reader. His 
focus is not only on clarity, with appropriate graphics (which we’ll discuss 
shortly). It’s also how to convey different information to different readers: 
“Concise and relevant reports with visuals are very useful. It is important to 
understand the users of reports: for executives, it’s better to be concise; for 
line managers and implementers, there might be more detail and explana￾tion.” The structure above allows writers to do exactly that.
Finally, you’ll see “appendices” in the suggested structure. You may 
already have these in your standard templates, and they can be useful for 
several reasons.
First, many report-writers rightly put in appendices material that others 
would be tempted to include in the executive summary. If you find yourself 
cluttering up the headline of your report with lots of background, or content 
from the terms of reference, you risk losing the reader. And if you lose the 
reader, you lose the opportunity to persuade him or her to improve the 
organization.
Second, appendices are the perfect place to put information that the 
reader – or you – may need, but not immediately. For example, if you refer 
to a recent piece of regulatory guidance, and one or two of your readers 
aren’t aware of the detail, put it in the appendix. Why would you delay the 
majority of your readers on information few of them want?
Other readers may be inveterate trouble-makers, prompting you to write 
defensively. We’ve all come across them – the ones who want to object to 
your test results or conclusions, but have no factual basis for doing so. Often 128 Radical Reporting
they simply don’t want the report to convey that their department or project 
isn’t doing well. (This goes back to communicating clearly through using 
active voice.) A common response from report-writers is to anticipate those 
objections and seek to overcome them pre-emptively by including lots of 
detail. “Look,” the writer says. “My findings and conclusions are sound! To 
prove it, here are seventeen paragraphs of mind-numbing detail, spread over 
seven pages, showing how well I understand the very process I’m assessing.”
This is no exaggeration – I did once read 17 paragraphs of mind-numbing 
detail, spread over seven pages, included solely to try to appease one or two 
senior trouble-makers. However, those senior trouble-makers are unlikely to 
change their behavior as long as you appease them. (This point takes us 
back to corporate or team culture.)
My experience is that stating what I’ve found in plain language, using the 
active voice and sufficient relevant supporting evidence, works. Then, if 
someone tries to claim that my findings are flawed because I didn’t under￾stand what I was testing, I can point to the detailed information in the 
appendix. It closes down the spurious objections and provides information 
for those who are genuinely interested. Most importantly, this approach 
doesn’t delay or distract the majority of readers, who want to read only the 
relevant information as easily as possible.
A good analogy is to think of the appendix (or appendices, if you have mul￾tiple elements) as the attic of your report. You wouldn’t keep skiing equipment 
in the entrance to your house all year round for visitors to trip over. Similarly, 
you shouldn’t keep information that is unlikely to be immediately useful in the 
body of the report. The usefulness is key here – I’m not saying you should 
throw away your skiing equipment if you occasionally ski, or references to 
detailed regulatory updates if a few readers may want to see them. It’s all about 
storing them where they’re accessible, but not in everyone’s way.
Speaking of regulatory updates, it’s worth covering how such mandated 
requirements may affect the structure of your report. It’s a good idea, as stated 
in Chapter 5, to consider regulatory requirements in the planning stage, so 
that you factor them in early. Look into government guidance on reporting, 
not just to comply with legislation, but also to make reports more effective.
The UK Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy recently 
published a white paper (a policy document setting out proposals for future 
legislation) entitled “Restoring trust in audit and corporate governance: 
Consultation on the government’s proposals.” Although it is primarily about 
external audit, there are sections entitled “Influencing the corporate reporting 
framework: Promoting brevity and comprehensibility in accounts and annual 
reports” and “Auditor reporting.”3 These sections address “the length and vol￾ume of company reporting, raising questions about its ability to deliver mean￾ingful information to stakeholders” and state that “auditors should provide 
users with more meaningful and useful opinions and information.”
The point to retain here is that the government paper is not prescribing a 
particular structure and order that would achieve these ends. Chapter 2
referred to the Deloitte study on Irish financial services organizations’ Structure and layout 129
regulatory reports. It demonstrated that these reports varied wildly in 
approach, structure, clarity, and even the degree to which the organizations 
answered the regulators’ questions.
Creating templates from scratch is in many ways easier than revising 
existing templates. One assurance professional who has experienced the lat￾ter is Vincent Chardot, Managing Director, Strategic Planning and Risk 
Management, Société Générale. He is introducing revised templates in the 
internal audit function, after a lengthy period looking at the function’s 
reporting objectives, the readers’ needs, and the best options.
Internal auditors’ (and others’) tendency to include too much informa￾tion, for all readers and all circumstances, makes concise reporting difficult. 
As Chardot says, 
Auditors have to carry a large number of investigations, and they very 
often feel the need to report about their work, regardless of the relevance 
of their findings versus the overall risk profile of the activity. Another 
big tendency that we saw in our project to simplify audit reports is that 
auditors tend to forget who their main reader is and try to address a 
multiplicity of potential readers in their reports. This often results in 
the same information being repeated in the report with various levels of 
detail, or in multiplying layers of unnecessary contextual information 
before the main message is addressed. 
This wasn’t the function’s first attempt to reduce page count and increase 
quality. “We actually had previous efforts of simplification that failed to 
reach their objective,” Chardot says. What has led to success this time were 
three crucial steps. 
First, benchmark practices with competition. Another key element is 
to get senior management support, and we received for example direct 
feedback from our CEO and the Board, in video messages and taped 
interviews that we broadcasted to the internal audit manager commu￾nity. Also, the auditors must be closely associated to the initiative, and 
the objectives clearly explained: we have actually seen through an inter￾nal survey that they were the first ones asking for change.
The first three chapters of this book focus on culture. Unsurprisingly, 
Chardot and his colleagues discovered that without considering culture, no 
project will succeed. “Changing culture is key,” he rightly says, “and this 
must be seen as a long-term effort, that associates continuous training and 
communication efforts towards the readers of our reports.”
The solution is not to create a one-size-fits-all approach to your reports 
– different audiences will have different needs. Nor is the solution to try to 
create a structure that encompasses every single possible reader’s need into 
a single document. The section on templates below will discuss the unhappy 
outcomes, both for writers and readers, of that approach.130 Radical Reporting
As with thinking deeply about your message and its recipients, and com￾municating in plain language, report structure must be deliberate and tai￾lored to readers. Depending on your area of expertise, your professional 
body may advise on what you must include, and in which part of the report 
it belongs. Keep in mind that just because you must include information 
doesn’t always mean you must include it in the executive summary – you 
may want to store it in the attic. If a regulator or other party requires you to 
include non-headline material in the executive summary, Chapter 8 will 
show how you can comply succinctly.
Below are a few of the many resources that may be useful to you, depend￾ing on your professional qualifications and specialist areas. In many cases, 
all you need to do is type a keyword such as “report” or “template” into the 
search function to receive a surprising list of posts, blogs, articles, and 
documents.
• The Institute of Risk Management (www.theirm.org/) has resources for 
(UK) listed companies whose reporting must comply with the Financial 
Reporting Council’s UK Corporate Governance Code
• The International Compliance Association (www.int-comp.org/about￾ica/), especially its Insight page
• The Information Systems Audit and Control Association (www.
isaca.org/) has several brief posts about writing reports, especially for 
non-IT audiences; you can follow links to full articles for more detail
• The Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (Global) www.
accaglobal.com/gb/en.html features information and resources for 
internal auditors as well as accountants
Don’t forget to consult national or regional chapters of your professional 
association, so that you see both global standards and local guidance. For 
example, as a certified internal auditor, I belong to both the Global Institute 
of Internal Auditors and the Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors (UK). 
I also have access (as a trainer) to the French chapter (IFACI). Looking 
at what is available on all the sites gives me a better idea of both world￾wide and nation-specific standards. The latter is particularly relevant when 
reporting on topics that vary according to jurisdiction: financial regulation, 
data protection, taxation, and so on.
Komitas Stepanyan works not only in a specialist field, but in a regulated 
environment. He always considers relevant standards and how they can 
help him better communicate to non-specialists, but also leaves room for 
individual judgment and creativity:
If we are talking about reporting something about IT or information/cyber￾security, there are standards like ISO27001, which has clear structure. If 
there is no standard requirement, such as IFRS in accounting or 27000-series 
in information security, then report-writing is like an art for me – there 
should not be any limitations to creative solutions and imagination.Structure and layout 131
Stepanyan is not the only cybersecurity expert mindful of how reports can 
fail to convey the very information their readers need. Jeffrey W. Brown, 
CISO for the State of Connecticut and cybersecurity advisor to boards, 
shares Stepanyan’s focus on putting the reader first and telling a story.
This is a topic that a lot of people get wrong. Security professionals 
share whatever information they can find or whatever is easy to com￾pile. They provide way too much data and they don’t provide enough 
business context around what the data means. This is a case where you 
need to start with your audience in mind and think about what they 
need or want to know from you. Don’t bury important information 
in the details or give them too much information that isn’t relevant. 
I personally like to start with a narrative instead of raw metrics and 
reporting. What is the story you’re trying to convey and then make sure 
the information you’re providing supports your narrative.
During the 2020 pandemic, many teams sought to streamline their written 
communications, to take into account new working conditions. As people 
communicated more by videoconference, many built stronger relationships 
and shared more information with distant colleagues. One of the results was 
the feeling that teams could reduce the amount and nature of formal report￾ing. Nothing had prevented them from adopting a more concise and read￾er-friendly approach before – but often it takes a crisis to make progress.4
Several internal audit teams are now using “report on a page” or “one￾page reports.” We can all see the appeal – who wouldn’t want to read one 
page instead of 10, 20, or more? Even if these one-pagers come with lengthy 
appendices, the principle of summarizing onto a page is excellent. However, 
in moving from one extreme to what some may see as another, how can we 
make sure one-pagers are useful?
First, as with any piece of writing, we must consider the purpose. Do we 
even need to issue a report, no matter how short? After all, the Institute of 
Internal Auditors’ Global Internal Audit Standards don’t say you have to 
communicate your findings in a report – only that you have to communicate 
them. As long as you include the objective, scope, and results (all of which 
you can summarize in a few sentences), you’re adhering to the Standards.
Let’s consider some other situations – and, as always, these are not inter￾nal audit-specific. You could as easily encounter them as a risk, compliance, 
cybersecurity, or even project management professional.
Imagine you’ve reviewed something in a team and found everything going 
well. Projects and tasks are on time and within budget while achieving 
objectives. The team has enough people and morale seems good. The man￾agers use a good combination of supervision, training, and regular commu￾nications to keep everyone’s skills and knowledge up to date.
In that case, why do you need to fill a page? Maybe an email will suffice. 
You can mention that you discovered no problems within the scope of your 132 Radical Reporting
review and are happy to discuss details with anyone interested. Marisa 
Melliou thinks that one-pagers are what senior people want to see. Above 
all, she advises against “submitting multiple page audit reports to justify 
that your audit work was good. My experience so far has shown that less is 
more. A one-page executive summary with the most critical issues is suffi￾cient to attract business leaders’ attention.”
At the other extreme, the review has produced a complicated or even contra￾dictory picture. In this case, you will need to be extremely careful in your lan￾guage – not to avoid giving offense, but to make sure every word is conveying 
an exact meaning. In this way, you can give more detail and context where 
needed, without getting bogged down in trivia, or falling back on corporate 
waffle. If you need to go to two pages to achieve this, is it the end of the world?
As always, keep the readers in mind, along with their possibly multiple 
expectations. John Chesshire appeals for writers to use the format that 
works best. Sometimes that will be a one-pager, sometimes more.
Our audiences often have contradictory needs and wants. I think we 
can all agree that concise reporting is important, but we can go too con￾cise for some of our stakeholders. As an audit committee chair, I want 
reassurance that the (internal audit, risk management or other) work 
has been done to a high standard, that any material issues have been 
identified and solutions agreed, and that where there is good practice, 
that this has been recognized and shared widely. You can’t always get 
all of this from a one-pager, or an elevator-pitch – but neither do I want 
to plough through 30 pages of low-level dirge to find it!
LAYOUT
As mentioned at the start, this is about the “look and feel” of a report. It 
should draw the reader’s eye, make him or her feel comfortable and bring 
the most important information to the fore. All too often, though, the 
layout becomes more about adhering to corporate style in terms of colors, 
fonts, and logos, rather than about readability.
This isn’t solely about people’s aesthetic preferences. All these elements 
– colors, fonts and font sizes, even margins and spacing – can make the 
written word more or less accessible to people. When we speak about 
accessibility, we often think of taking people’s disabilities or special needs 
into account – visual impairment or dyslexia, for instance. However, mak￾ing things accessible for an intended group often results in unintended ben￾efits for everyone. Consider wheelchair ramps outside buildings; like 
accessible documents, these help organizations comply with anti-discrimi￾nation legislation in different countries. Yet people who don’t use wheel￾chairs can also benefit from ramps: parents pushing children in strollers, Structure and layout 133
for instance, or someone able-bodied but carrying a bulky load that may 
make climbing stairs risky.
Similarly, if you present your writing in clear, uncluttered documents, all 
your readers will benefit. Even a reader without dyslexia and blessed with 
perfect eyesight will not appreciate having to peer at a page of dense, unbro￾ken text in a small, elaborate font. I mentioned earlier having seen board 
and committee reports hundreds of pages long, often in tiny text. It wasn’t 
only the length that prevented scrutiny – it was also the sheer headache￾inducing effort of reading six-point font.
Think of your own reaction to such pages – do you anticipate reading 
the content with joy or dread? Contrast this with your reaction to more 
reader-friendly pages, featuring lots of white space, and larger and less 
elaborate fonts.
There are so many resources intended to make documents more accessi￾ble, but from which we can all benefit. The endnotes of Chapter 5 include 
resources for people with dyslexia. However, advice on producing accessible 
documents will broaden access for all. There are many sources of informa￾tion, and unsurprisingly, colleges and universities are often at the forefront 
of providing evidence-based advice and tools. Edinburgh University 
Information Services’ “Creating accessible materials” web page is excellent, 
as is the University of Washington’s “Creating accessible documents.”5 The 
Plain Language Association International runs events about plain language 
as a means to promoting civil rights, and Martin Cutts devotes a chapter of 
The Oxford Guide to Plain English to making language accessible to vari￾ous groups.6 Whoever the intended audience for accessible documents, 
everyone benefits.
The most common pieces of advice from these different resources include 
using sans-serif fonts rather than serif fonts, as the former can be simpler 
and easier to read. Serif fonts can be reader-friendly, as long as they are not 
too elaborate. The next time you draft a document in Word, compare the 
text in different fonts – for instance, Times New Roman (a serif font) with 
Arial (sans-serif). You will see how sans-serif produces a cleaner, plainer line, 
especially on screen.
Font size matters, too. Depending on the type of font, most documents 
should be in at least ten-point if not larger. People can always use the zoom 
function on computer screens to increase the size of the page in front of 
them, as they might use a magnifying glass with paper documents. However, 
few hard-copy documents handed out at board meetings come with magni￾fying glasses!
Finally, contrast is important. The easiest way to achieve this is to use 
black text on white background. Some organizations, though, come into 
conflict with their communications and marketing departments over this. If 
the marketing people have decided that the corporate style is a white font 
on a red background, this will cause eyestrain to many readers. The worst 
example I ever saw was a report in pale brown, elaborate, almost 134 Radical Reporting
copperplate script on a lavender background. When I asked the team why 
they’d done this, the answer was that they felt their reports weren’t eye￾catching enough. The result was possibly aesthetically eye-catching – but 
literally unreadable.
Report layout doesn’t rely only on text – sometimes, words aren’t the way 
forward. Visuals such as photographs, charts, graphs, and line illustrations 
can bring a topic to life and vary how you deliver information to readers. 
Keep in mind that the colors you use in your visuals may or may not help 
readers. Those with color blindness can have trouble distinguishing red and 
green, making “traffic-light” or “RAG” (red-amber-green) status reporting 
charts inaccessible. One solution is to make sure you include the words 
“red,” “amber,” or “green” on or around the colored sections. Another solu￾tion could be to think of a fresher way to convey the message, possibly with 
images. After all, the now-classic traffic-light approach, while appearing to 
be the easy option, can provoke strong emotional responses in readers. You 
may end up spending more time arguing about the color than discussing 
substance. 
Interactive reporting can even allow readers to click on charts and links in 
the electronic version of a report to see further detail. This is an excellent 
way to keep the body of the report uncluttered. Vertical lists using bullet 
points or numbers are also much more useful than a rambling list over sev￾eral lines of a single sentence. The list approach saves the reader the trouble 
of working out the different elements of the sentence and their relationships; 
it presents a clear number of items, distinct from each other.
Varying how you present your information, while keeping it clear and 
uncluttered, will appeal to the widest relevant range of readers. Komitas 
Stepanyan points out that sometimes
you need to communicate something without knowing who your audi￾ence is. Different people may receive, accept, and analyze the same 
information in different ways. For example, I may prefer long, detailed 
text, while my colleague may prefer more visuals, and graphs instead of 
numbers, in text with detailed explanations.
Speaking specifically of reports, he shares his experience of creating two 
documents to meet readers’ needs:
While working in the Internal Audit department at the Central Bank 
of Armenia, we were doing a presentation for each audit engagement. 
It was not easy to write reports in Word, and then create a PowerPoint 
report. Sometimes it may have been seen as time consuming. However, 
if this approach helps you fulfill your objective, then any effort, any way 
of communication is useful.
His colleague Ara Chalabyan shared the same experience:Structure and layout 135
When I was in an assurance function, I asked my team to be creative. 
We switched from MS Word reports to slides with visual content to the 
extent possible. There is no standard for good writing but inquisitiveness, 
the constant search for excellence. Do not copy and paste old templates: 
use creative tools, animation, transitions, highlighting, photo, and video.
Showing that this approach knows no borders, Marisa Melliou is also a 
fan of simplifying reports not only through writing but also through the 
medium. She wants report-writers to “Break down complex or highly 
technical concepts into relatable terms, while also turning facts and data 
into a compelling, colorful narrative that the business can act upon. Use 
PowerPoint presentations or videos – no more MS Word paper reports!”
If report-writers are to do all this – think carefully, use plain language, 
plan rigorously, and structure reports adapted to readers’ needs and expec￾tations – they will need to spend time and energy doing so. Can standard￾izing report templates help them recoup some of this time and effort, and be 
more efficient?
TEMPLATES
Most teams have standardized templates for reports and other regular writ￾ing. It saves time, fosters consistency, and often helps new members of staff 
understand what to write where. There are many excellent reasons to have 
standardized templates – as long as we keep in mind that they are a means 
to an end, not an end in themselves.
This means that templates stop being useful the minute people justify 
including irrelevant or repetitive information by saying the template requires 
it. If you have templates that encourage or compel poor communication, 
change the template.
Having said that, many people have complained to me that they write 
badly because they’re forced to use a bad template. Sometimes this is true. 
Other times, the template is fine – the problem is what people are writing 
in it. It also happens that blank templates feature sound guidance in each 
section, stating clearly its purpose and what writers should include. 
However, it’s common for people to read the guidance the first time they 
complete the report template, and never again. Instead, each time they 
write a new report, they simply replace the previous report’s content with 
new content and save the new version. Any memory they have of the guid￾ance fades as the weeks, months, and years pass, until they claim no knowl￾edge of any guidance, whether at team or organization level. As Rachel 
Browne says, “We have a corporate style guide. People don’t always use it 
or even know it exists. We use report templates which are meant to be tai￾lored, but people see a section in the template and think they have to write 136 Radical Reporting
something for every section.” The result, unsurprisingly, is unnecessary 
detail and disengaged readers.
When this happens, teams often notice reports aren’t having the effect 
they should. Rather than stripping the template back to basics, though, they 
compound the original problems by adding yet more unwanted content. As 
I write this book, one of my clients is reviewing its report template, which 
has grown over the years to nearly 30 pages when blank!
The template has developed organically and, as various readers have men￾tioned not being able to find information, the client has added more sub￾sections and sub-sub-sections. This goes back to the signpost analogy – instead 
of making the content clear, the client is simply adding more opportunities to 
include and repeat unclear content. The repetition inherent in this kind of 
template solves no problems and creates many more. First, repetition turns 
readers off – they see information they’ve already seen and think, “I know 
this – there’s nothing new after this. I can stop reading now.” If they keep 
reading, they may notice inconsistencies. This client has several sections to 
the report in which the same information (or much of it) is presented in 
slightly different ways. If we imagine that the report covers topics A, B, C, 
D, E, and F, the client’s current template does this:
• Section 1: A, B, C, and D
• Section 2: A, B, C, D, E, and F
• Section 3: B, C, F, and A
• Section 4: D, E, and sub-sections of A and C
• and so on (for 30 pages)
You can imagine how hard it is to follow, let alone infer a coherent mes￾sage. I have several times had to spread the pages of the reports out across 
a desk and draw color-coded lines among them to track what appears from 
one section to the next, what disappears, and what seems to transform into 
something altogether different.
Few readers will analyze the reports in such depth. As we mentioned ear￾lier, they will stick to the executive summary and trust this gives them what 
they need. However, you can see from my description above that the execu￾tive summary does not appear to include all the relevant information. And 
if your template is 30 pages before you even begin to populate it, how can 
you – let alone the poor reader – keep track of your content?
Even if you do, other inconsistencies will appear. If your report template 
requires you to refer to specific findings or observations in three or four dif￾ferent places, then, if you receive last-minute changes, you will have to carry 
those changes through the whole report. If, being human, tired, and under Structure and layout 137
pressure, you overlook one of those changes, someone is bound to notice. 
“You said there’s a 67% failure rate here, but in the executive summary it 
says 82%. What’s going on?”
You can all imagine the stress and confusion over-engineered templates 
can cause. The best thing is to choose the most basic one, to which you add 
only if you must.
Different organizations will have different standards and expectations; 
communications formats and templates will also differ. One security aware￾ness professional, with experience serving in the military, has compared 
reporting in the army and in the private sector, concluding that quality suf￾fers when standards are inconsistent.
The standard of reporting in the corporate sector is significantly lower 
than what I saw in the military. The military uses a standard template 
to produce documents across all three services and joint units. This 
creates a simple process to follow, and ensures issues and recommen￾dations are clearly articulated and understood. Equally, senior deci￾sion-makers expect the quality of written work to be high and enforce 
such standards. This is not the case in the corporate sector (or at least 
what I experienced). The diversity of personalities and approaches, 
with no enforced standardization – unless a report was going to senior 
executive level – meant the general quality of reporting was mediocre 
at best, and often difficult to understand. However, a positive attribute 
of “report writing” freedom is creativity. The lack of standardization 
in the corporate sector, that I saw, meant employees had the opportu￾nity to express ideas in different ways. This opened up the opportunity 
for creativity, and did make report writing more engaging for a wider 
audience.
There are pros and cons to all approaches; consider what works best for your 
readers, in your organization. Simplicity is always a good basis, whether in 
language or in structure. Keep it simple and you can then easily and clearly 
develop where necessary. A streamlined template allows for exactly the kind 
of creativity several experts have called for in this chapter.
Next are three different sample templates: one I created; one from a for￾mer client; and a one-pager from another client. (The client documents 
appear anonymously and with permission.)
All three are from and reflect an internal-audit context, but you can adapt 
them to your own needs, simplifying the language where possible.138 Radical Reporting
Sample template A, page 1.
Report title and reference number (if applicable)
Month DD, YYYY 
Responsible executive’s name and full title 
Executive summary
Audit rating 
Rating goes here
Findings by risk level Risk assessment
Prior Audit Rating (Month, 
Year) 
Rating goes here (remove if
NA) 
High: 0 Medium: 0
Low: 0
Inherent: H/M/L 
Residual: H/M/L 
Business overview (optional)
Provide a brief (one to two sentence) overview of the audited entity: high-level
description and size metrics. If you feel readers need a reminder of objectives, scope or
methodology, consider including the terms of reference as an appendix. 
Conclusions
One or two short paragraphs. The first paragraph should answer the question, ‘What do
we think of how this area manages its risks?’. Conclusions should provide rationale and
justification for the selected report rating and should not simply summarize individual
findings. Make clear whether the client has accepted our conclusions fully, partly or not
at all. 
Summary of high- and medium-risk 
Risk 
Rating Subject
Action owner 
and due date 
1 H/M Observation Full Name
Full Date
2 H/M Observation Full Name
Full Date
Audit titlePage 1 of 4
Date DD/MM/YYYY Audit reference number (if applicable)Structure and layout 139
Sample template A, page 2.
Detailed findings (in order of severity – high, medium and low) 
Finding 1 title: This should give enough information so as to be meaningful if extracted
to appear in MI. ‘People’ or ‘Cash handling’ is not enough – ‘Unclear recruitment
process’ or ‘Inconsistent cash-handling procedures’ is more useful. 
Observation: This should answer the question, ‘Who is not doing what?’ This will
almost never be an individual – rather, a team, a department, or senior management. If
a control is not in place, then you can word it in terms of ‘X has not put in place Y.’
Risk: This should answer the question, ‘Why do we care?’, and should articulate a clear
financial, reputational, regulatory or safety risk. It should not list further failed controls.
Root cause: This should answer the question, ‘Why is the control inadequate or
ineffective?’ It must not repeat or rephrase the observation.
Additional information (optional): This section can be useful for further detail – test
results making clear the materiality, or regulatory guidance. Its purpose would be to
keep such detail out of the observation. If you need to include extensive detail – pages
of MI, for instance – that can go into an appendix.
Management action plan 
Action owner and 
due date
1.01 Each element of the action plan must address root cause. Name
Unit
Due Date
1.02 Each element of the action plan must address root cause. Name
Unit
Due Date
Page 2 of 4 Audit title
Date DD/MM/YYYY Audit reference number (if applicable)140 Radical Reporting
Sample template A, page 5.
Distribution and Audit Team 
To:
Cc:
Audit team: 
Page 3 of 4 Audit title
Date DD/MM/YYYY Audit reference number (if applicable)Structure and layout 141
Sample template A, page 6.
Appendices 
This is for additional information that does not need to be in the body of the report.
Items you can usefully put here include: 
• Terms of reference, or elements of the ToR (object ives, scope, timescales,
 methodology etc.) 
• Regulatory guidance
• Benchmarking documents 
• Policy documents 
• Process maps 
• Detailed test results 
• Lists of people consulted or interviewed
Page 4 of 4 Audit title
Date DD/MM/YYYY Audit reference number (if applicable)142 Radical Reporting
Sample template B, cover sheet.Structure and layout 143
Sample template B, page 1.144 Radical Reporting
Sample template B, page 2.
Sample template B, page 3.Structure and layout 145
Next are two further examples of one-pagers. The first is for an audit report, 
the second for a report to the audit committee. You could adapt this approach 
to your internal and external readers, including steering committees.
Source: SWAP Internal Audit Services
Source: Malcolm Zack, Duyen Nguyen, and Scott Petersen. Designed for an organ￾ization in the testing and certification sector. The information provided is based 
on a hypothetical scenario and has no relationship with the company concerned.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW
OVERALL ASSURANCE RATING
KEY HIGHLIGHTS
IMPROVEMENT OPPORTUNITES
OVERALL OPINION
Ascertain and assess the processes and controls used by ABC including non 
standard methods introduced outside the system.
Evaluate the effectiveness of management methods to address the gaps in the 
system.
Confirm the security and related controls implemented to address the lapses 
discovered during autumn 2020.
Determine key root causes of the issues that arose in late 2020.
8 6 59 £1.5m
Designate an
executive owner 
for business 
change for all 
future projects.
Document 
changes to
processes 
introduced.
Establish a strategy 
for business change 
as part of project 
implementations.
Reduce number
of individuals with
high access 
rights and correct 
SoDconflicts.
The XXXX was first introduced by the company in March 2020 to help improve the YYY systems and processes following the implementation in 2019.
However, the performance of the system was less than expected and users began to revert to older methods and spreadsheets. The discovery of
misstatements in the ZZZ accounts and a number of irregularities has raised the risk of further errors or potential for fraud. This review was agreed with the
Audit Committee after consultation with management and will aim to provide visibility of the key issues affecting the DDDD.
BUSINESS CONTEXT
GOOD PRACTICES
General supervision of changes since the problems arose
Management Action plan in place to revise accounts for divisions affected
Improved documentation of approvals and sign offs
Introduction of security logging and random expense checking
LOW MEDIUM HIGH
The audit focused on the HIJ and PPP business areas.
• Over 40 segregation of duties (SoD) conflicts had arisen since implementation by
 amending predefined roles to address gaps in functionality.
• No evidence of proper planned changes to business processes that would occur
 once XXX implemented. Other than training the impact of XXX on how ABC
 operates was not fully considered.
• Introduction of methods and compensating controls were introduced by
 management chiefly due to design gaps missed during the earlier stages of the
 project. This and lack of business change strategies were the primary cause of the
 enforced changes.
• The changes introduced caused SoD and security conflicts which created
 opportunities for error, irregularities and misstatements. The risk of fraud remains.
In our opinion, there remains an low level of assurance over ABC’s new XXX system
and supporting processes. Compensating controls and processes introduced to
compensate the missing functionality have included security and access problems which
should have been avoided.
Executive oversight is required for future similar sized projects with much stronger
business change strategies as part of such projects.
XXXX Implementation – System Issues Review
Executive Summary
Months in
scope
Process areas
reviewed
Security and
SoD conflicts
Cost of
irregularities/errors146 Radical Reporting
If you already have a template and are unsure how to make it more effec￾tive, try the following. Create a “focus group” of six to ten regular readers 
of your reports. These people may be board or committee members, senior 
managers, or even operational experts responsible for putting recommenda￾tions in place. Choose people who will give you honest, unbiased, measured, 
and informed responses. Ask them the following:
• When you read our reports, what do you always turn to first?
• What do you always skip?
• And what do you wish we could include that we currently don’t?
The answers may surprise you, but they will also help you produce a more 
effective template. Your respondents’ answers to the first question will show 
you where you have perhaps too much “filler” at the beginning of the report. 
If your executive summary starts with sub-headings such as “introduction,” 
“background,” and “context,” most readers will quickly learn where the 
real substance is. They will turn immediately to page three, five, or even 
seven, if that’s where your actual executive summary lies.
If this is the case, your task is simple: move whatever they read first to the 
front. If the “filler” that currently delays readers is for any reason truly necessary, 
think where else you could put it. Does it belong in an appendix – in the attic?
The answers to the second question should also lead to an obvious change 
in the template. If your most thoughtful and responsible readers always skip 
Source: Malcolm Zack, Duyen Nguyen, and Scott Petersen. Designed for an organ￾ization in the testing and certification sector. The information provided is based 
on a hypothetical scenario and has no relationship with the company concerned.Structure and layout 147
something, you can probably delete it. If you’re including it for legal or regu￾latory reasons, consider storing it in the report’s attic.
The third question prompts some of the most amusing responses – amus￾ing, because often people wish you’d include something that’s already there! 
However, that is useful information. If you are including information, but 
readers don’t realize it, one of two things is happening. Your readers aren’t 
reading far enough into the report, or they’re reading the whole report, but 
don’t realize you’ve included what they need. In either case, you must ask 
why. Likely reasons include wordy, convoluted writing, and misleading or 
repetitive report structures. Identify what is preventing your readers from 
finding the information they want, and correct it.
The example below comes from a company whom I’ve advised about 
creating more reader-friendly templates. You’ll see that the order reflects the 
structure shown at the beginning of this chapter. What’s more, it’s the result 
of exactly the type of readers’ survey I’ve just described.
The uniquely helpful thing about this format is that it’s all within the 
body of an email, with hyperlinks to detailed findings. Readers don’t have to 
open any attachments – simply scroll and, if they wish, click.
A final image comes again from Zack, Nguyen, and Petersen. It shows how 
interactive reporting – in this case, using business intelligence (BI) tools, can 
allow readers to click on a particular element and see a detailed window pop up.148 Radical Reporting
Providing what people need in one page – or, even better, in one email – gives 
them the essential information at the start and, crucially, choice. Rather than forc￾ing everyone to work through page after page, hunting for something relevant, 
this format allows readers to select as much or as little detail as they need.
Video reports have become more popular in recent years. Larry Herzog Butler, 
Global Head of Internal Audit at Delivery Hero, based in Berlin, introduced 
video reporting during Covid-19 lockdowns. They now produce brief – two- to 
three-minute – videos at seven- to ten-day intervals throughout audit engage￾ments. These videos update viewers on the progress of the engagement, good 
Source: Delivery Hero SE
Source: Malcolm Zack, Duyen Nguyen, and Scott Petersen. Designed for an organ￾ization in the testing and certification sector. The information provided is based 
on a hypothetical scenario and has no relationship with the company concerned.
Interactive Internal Audit Report (Pilot)
Dashboard 1
Data Point Data Point Data Point 
Data Sources
Executive Director
Recommendations or Agreed
Actions
Dashboard 1
Data Point Data Point Data Point
Da Data Sources
Executive Director
Recommendations or Agreed
Actions
Logo
Logo
Status by X
Trends analysis of X
Data comparison Information
Findings and Root Causes
Risks
Segment analysis
Issue
Interactive data to click on
Interactive Power BI report – Extract.
Detailed finding section on left has normal
audit information. Graphics on right side of 
that page provide initial information that the 
user can click or drill into. Opens up 
supporting dashboard which supports 
findings, root cause and risk pointsStructure and layout 149
news, and areas of concern. The response, says Butler, has been extremely posi￾tive, and the team’s internal audit report includes a link to the video. 
Another audit leader who uses videos – currently in conjunction with full 
written reports – is Michele Variale, Chief Audit and Risk Officer at Telepass. 
In an edition of The Audit Podcast, hosted by Trent Russell, he discussed his 
team’s experience of communicating results by video. 
It’s a good way to also test how strong you are on your beliefs about the 
results of the audit, how powerful you are on your storytelling, which 
is not a list of issues, it’s a business discussion with the CEO on the 
impact of a process or any control breakdowns on the achievement of 
the objectives of the organization. We need to step up, and by using a 
video, we are forced to step up.7
Initially, Variale states, people were a bit skeptical – as they had been with 
other changes such as “agile” auditing, use of robotics, and combined assur￾ance. However, 
then the CEO and Chairman saw huge benefits for the simple fact that 
it’s freeing up time. They can view the video in a taxi or queuing for 
a flight, immediately get a flavour, understand the level of attention 
needed for the audit report. 
The videos always end with an invitation to contact the team with any 
questions – so rather than a written report acting as the final word, the video 
is an invitation to a conversation. His team is now seeing more response to 
videos than to previous methods of communicating results.
As Trent Russell says, different media can make your readers’ lives easier 
and convey understanding and respect for them. “In being able to send a 
video, you’ve made a point about respecting that person's time. It also frees 
you up from having to schedule a meeting,” he says to Variale in the podcast. 
And, he wonders, how often will people now leave a meeting thinking, 
“[t]hat meeting should have been a video”? 
Liz Sandwith is an internal audit and risk consultant. Her distinguished 
career includes leading internal audit at Bupa, Channel 5 (UK) and the UK 
Electoral Commission, as well as advising a number of local authorities and 
the Information Commissioner’s Office on internal audit and risk manage￾ment issues. She has seen every format and fashion of reports come and go.
Based on 33 years in internal audit, I would suggest that written com￾munication is often a challenge for internal auditors. Reports often 
vary in length from 40+ pages to the new, more concise approach, with 
reports being five pages or fewer. However, whatever the length, the 
challenge is still present. Sometimes more words confuse and muddle 
the message – as can reports that are too short. A CEO once said to me 150 Radical Reporting
that if you cannot convey your message or story in a page, then you 
probably don’t understand the message.
Improving your report templates using your readers’ views obviously will 
help meet their needs. But it also benefits the team producing the report. 
Whenever clients tell me they have recently updated their report templates, 
I notice that the team members seem resentful and exhausted. This is often 
because certain people will have worked hard to create the existing tem￾plate. When the team as a whole then discusses how to change it, it’s natural 
for people to feel protective and defensive of their work. This then turns 
what should be a positive exercise – improving what the team produces for 
readers – into a closed and often heated debate within the team.
Looking outward changes the dynamic, and de-personalizes the discus￾sion. Instead of someone saying, “We need to change Sara’s template,” it 
becomes, “Eight of our ten focus-group readers turn immediately to page 
five. The most useful information for them is there, so can we move it to 
page one?” As a result, the process of improving the template achieves its 
aim without damaging individual or team morale.
Some teams tend to avoid the debate about templates altogether by leav￾ing it to software. Program management and writing-specific software pack￾ages are available. Both collate the information available and produce a 
draft report in a pre-defined format. This can be useful, provided you know 
exactly what purpose the report serves, and which structure and layout will 
best meet that purpose.
Some people use “report” to mean any document showing the results of 
computer-assisted research, including data analytics products.8 Others will 
mean reports as we are discussing them here – reports that give a high-level 
message supported by discrete findings or observations. If your team uses or 
is considering using program management software to record your field￾work and test results, and produce a concluding report, make sure you can 
tailor the report template to your and your readers’ needs. If the standard 
report produced by the software has too many fields and subfields, you risk 
repetition, error, and losing the reader.
More important, remember the classic computing acronym, GIGO: gar￾bage in, garbage out. However good the software, if you populate fields with 
poorly reasoned, poorly written text, don’t be surprised if the resulting 
report is unreadable.
Remember always – reports are a means to an end, not an activity in 
themselves. As we saw earlier, at least one professional body (the Institute of 
Internal Auditors) doesn’t even mandate a written report. 
In the first edition, I referred repeatedly to reports prompting action. On 
reflection – prompted by Mike Jacka’s excellent insights on the IIA Global 
blog – I realized that this doesn’t reflect practice; nor should it. If we are 
communicating throughout an audit engagement, risk or compliance review, Structure and layout 151
or information security check – then what is in the report should come as no 
surprise to anyone, least of all the readers. 
As Jacka says, “If you are still using the report to prompt the reader into 
taking action, you have already lost the battle.”9
So, what do reports do, if not prompt action? According to Jacka, “The 
report is a reminder to everyone of what has occurred — a record of agree￾ment.” This should be the case in audit, risk, compliance, and information 
security. However, certain reports may indeed exist to prompt action – in the 
case of a board paper asking members to make a decision, for instance. An 
even more compelling example is that of the Intelligence Community 
Assessment (ICA) produced by Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), National 
Security Agency (NSA), and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in January 
2017 on Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. The Key 
Judgments section of the report concludes, “We assess Moscow will apply 
lessons learned from its Putin-ordered campaign aimed at the US presiden￾tial election to future influence efforts worldwide, including against US allies 
and their election processes.”10 Although the ICA is not in a position to 
dictate to the government of the day what action to take, it’s clear it wishes 
its report to prompt action, to safeguard the integrity of future elections.
Given how many organizations rely on reports, though, the format in 
which they’re issued matters. Structure, layout, and templates can all help or 
hinder understanding. If they’re not aiding readers and leading to improve￾ments, you must discover and address the reason. No matter how estab￾lished standard templates or reporting habits are, if they’re not working, the 
organization isn’t working.
Think of where you can seek advice on how to make the “look and feel” 
of your reports more appealing and therefore more effective. We’ve men￾tioned professional bodies that provide guidance to members, as well as 
internal focus groups of readers. Another often underused source is quality 
assessment (QA) teams. You may have one within your function, or there 
may be an organization-wide team focusing solely on quality. What good 
and bad practices do they see in the organization and elsewhere? QA teams 
keep abreast of industry standards and peer practices, including written 
communications.
You may discover that pressure is affecting the quality of structure, lay￾out, and templates. If people are so busy issuing reports that they don’t have 
time to see if the medium is effective, then they are wasting time and effort. 
Reports delivered on time but in a reader-repellent format don’t help any￾one. As Komitas Stepanyan says, “I think no matter where you work – pri￾vate or public sector – effective and timely communication is a crucial 
component and good indicator of how mature the organization/institution 
is.”
Effective comes first, although timely is important. Keeping your struc￾ture, layout, and templates simple will help you deliver better reports on 
time, meeting readers’ and the organization’s needs.152 Radical Reporting
ACTIVITY
Imagine you’ve recently joined a team, and a colleague has shared an outline of 
the report template. Can you identify at least six elements likely to distract or 
confuse readers? You don’t need any specialist knowledge or further reading 
for this exercise – trust your judgment and common sense. (Suggested answers 
after the chapter summary.)
 I. Title: IT review
II. Executive summary
A. Introduction: an overview of the topic
B. Background: background to the topic
C. Context: wider organizational context, including scope of review
D. Key summary: summary of review
E . Key messages: summary of key messages from review
F . Conclusions: conclusions of review
III. Summary for committees
IV. Recommendations
A. Improvement A
B . Improvement B
C. Improvement C
D. Action plan agreed by management
 V. Appendix: detailed findings
 VI. Appendix: test results
VII. Next steps
SUMMARY
• Well-reasoned and well-written reports need reader-friendly formats. If 
your reader can’t read your report, your efforts will have been in vain.
• Thinking about how you structure your reports – continuing from the 
planning stage – will make them more logical and coherent.
• The simplest structure (title, executive summary, findings or observa￾tions, recommendations, and appendices) is the best approach.
• Too many sub-sections and layers encourage repetition and error, and 
discourage readers.
• The layout must be easy on the eye. Advice from government agencies, 
charities, and other organizations about making documents accessible 
will benefit all readers.Structure and layout 153
• Templates can save time and effort, but only if they respond to readers’ 
needs. If you find yourself populating a template with unnecessary or 
repetitive information because the template demands it, change the tem￾plate. Seek your readers’ advice on what they find most and least useful, 
and adapt accordingly.
• Software programs can produce reports from populated fields, but 
those using them must take responsibility for the template and quality 
of content.
• You needn't restrict yourself to traditional reporting methods - emails, 
presentations, even videos can all be ways of communicating your results 
more clearly and efficiently.
ACTIVITY – SUGGESTED ANSWERS
Elements that are likely to distract or confuse readers – did you find at least 
six of these?
1) The title is too vague.
2) The executive summary has too many sections.
3) What is the difference between introduction and background?
4) Context can be useful as long as it is not too lengthy. Chapter 8 will 
discuss this in more detail.
5) Key summary: Is this the actual executive summary?
6) Key messages: How is this different from the key summary? If it’s a list 
of findings, this isn’t the place for it.
7) Conclusions of review: Again, is this the actual executive summary?
8) Summary for committees: I have seen this only once among thou￾sands of reports. What is its purpose? Is it because the executive 
summary itself doesn’t summarize effectively for committees?
9) Recommendations: Why would you start with recommendations, 
before stating what problem they should solve? Chapter 7 will discuss 
this in more detail, but the lack of logic is clear.154 Radical Reporting
10) Action plan agreed by management: Again, this seems illogical. If the 
action plan includes the recommendations, there is unnecessary rep￾etition. If the action plan doesn’t include the recommendations, then 
there is a disagreement between management and the report authors. 
This needs to be clear in the executive summary.
11) Many teams included detailed findings in an appendix. This is accept￾able, but not if it leads report-writers to repeat the findings in the 
executive summary for fear readers won’t read the findings.
12) Next steps: How is this different from the recommendations and 
agreed action plan? You may conclude that the template can be sim￾pler, or that you could use another medium altogether. Once you have 
organized your thoughts, as discussed in previous chapters, the results 
should apply to any means of communication: report, presentation, 
video, or other.
NOTES
1 Pressfield, Nobody, 163.
2 747. See also Chapter 15, “Reports to Executive Management and the Board” 
(849–81).
3 March 2021, 82, 106, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/970673/restoring-trust-in-au￾dit-and-corporate-governance-command-paper.pdf
4 From content and attendee contributions to a Chartered Institute of Internal 
Auditors webinar entitled “Reporting during and after Covid-19: less is more?,” 
hosted by Sara I. James and Liz Sandwith, July 23, 2020, October 16, 2020, and 
May 18, 2021.
5 Edinburgh University Information Services www.ed.ac.uk/information-ser￾vices/help-consultancy/accessibility/creating-materials and University of 
Washington www.washington.edu/accessibility/documents/. See also advice 
from the UK government www.gov.uk/guidance/publishing-accessible￾documents, AbilityNet (created by IBM and Microsoft) abilitynet.org.uk/
factsheets/creating-accessible-documents-0, the UK charity Change www.
changepeople.org/getmedia/923a6399-c13f-418c-bb29-051413f7e3a3/
How-to-make-info-accessible-guide-2016-Final, and Mohawk College 
www.mohawkcollege.ca/about-mohawk/accessibility/tools-and-resources/
creating-accessible-documents-and-alternate-formats
6 “Writing low-literacy plain English,” 269–81.
7 The Audit Podcast Episode 185: Audit Reports and How They Solve Audit’s 
Biggest Issue w/ Michele Variale www.youtube.com/watch?v=48JpbfjjVOsStructure and layout 155
8 Tommie Singleton, “IS Audit Basics: What Every IT Auditor Should Know about 
Computer-generated Reports,” ISACA Journal Archives, October 1, 2014, www.
isaca.org/resources/isaca-journal/past-issues/2014/is-audit-basics-what-every-it￾auditor-should-know-about-computer-generated-reports
9 Mike Jacka, “Mind of Jacka: Prompt Versus Remind,” IIA Global blog, March 9, 
2023 https://internalauditor.theiia.org/en/voices/2023/mind-of-jacka-prompt-versus￾remind/
10 ICA_2017_01.pdf (dni.gov), p. ii.Part 3
Words into actionDOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-10 159
Chapter 7
Findings or observations 
and recommendations
We’ve covered the prerequisites of any effective piece of writing: culture, 
reflection, plain language, and rigorous planning. If you were building a 
house, you’d check the ground first and work closely with an architect on a 
good blueprint, before sinking solid foundations. Only then could you start 
building – let alone decorating – the house.
Now we come to building: to the information we include to document or 
prompt action. Thinking about your readers, both internal and external, 
will reveal different backgrounds, training, and experience. As Chapter 5
demonstrated, careful planning can help you better understand who is read￾ing the report, for what purpose, and in what context.
Any report will convey findings or observations. These could be audit or 
risk findings, which some teams call issues. Compliance teams may refer to 
them as test results. IT and cybersecurity teams use a variety of terms, 
depending on what they think will best grab readers’ attention. I’ve seen 
“findings,” “issues,” “observations,” “key points,” and even “weaknesses.” 
The last one certainly uses plain language, which best alerts readers to prob￾lems. Terminology – like tone – can affect not only interpretation but also 
relationships, as Richard Chambers and Norman Marks have pointed out.1
In this book, we’ll use the term “finding,” as it can cover everything from 
neutral observations to serious warnings.
Your readers likely include different levels of management. Senior manag￾ers and board members may read reports simply for information or because 
they need to take strategic decisions and issue directions to resolve findings 
described in your report. Other managers – such as operational and middle 
management – will be responsible for correcting findings. This takes us back 
to the suggested order at the beginning of Chapter 6; everyone will read the 
executive summary, while those needing detailed information and recom￾mendations will read further. You can also structure the findings themselves 
to order information from the broadest to the most detailed, as this chapter 
will show.160 Radical Reporting
It often goes back to what we discussed in Chapter 1 – culture and com￾munication. Remind yourself who your readers are, where they come from, 
and what they expect. You may find different reactions to findings depend￾ing on national or regional culture. Rinus de Hooge has found that
in countries with a recent authoritarian regime, e.g. former Soviet coun￾tries, management takes the report very seriously and asks for instruc￾tions how to implement individual actions on findings. It is seen as a 
directive by audit. In countries where there is no history of authoritar￾ianism, discussion is more open and disagreement about findings and 
ratings are accepted. In the Netherlands it is almost a sport to disagree 
first with audit and then turn around. It is rare that the recipient lifts the 
report above the individual findings, and tries to discuss the root cause 
of the situation and tries to fix that – and not the individual findings. I 
have seen this happening in Scandinavia where the finding itself was not 
that interesting, but the cause was discussed.
However interested your readers are in different elements of findings, those 
elements must all be present. But what are they?
There are different approaches to writing what I’ve called findings, depend￾ing on your function and audience. I am in the habit of applying what some 
may call an internal-audit-specific approach, but I’ve found it applies to vari￾ous settings, including project management. One client, formerly an internal 
auditor but now in organizational security, always asks me to use this approach 
when training her teams, no matter their function. It works, she says, because 
it makes people focus on the non-negotiable elements of a finding.
The first element is an observation. This is whatever is happening (or not) 
that is worth commenting on. The second element is the risk – what is the 
tangible harm that could come to the organization from this situation? The 
third element is the root cause: how did this situation arise?
Some internal audit functions use an approach called the five Cs. In this 
approach – which is not and never has been required by the Institute of 
Internal Auditors – the finding includes criteria (or criterion, if singular), 
condition, consequence, cause, and corrective action.
The five Cs list is pleasingly alliterative, but how useful is it? Many teams 
use it in their reports, and their fieldwork documentation will certainly need 
to include at least the first four Cs. However, I believe in simplifying life, so 
focus on three questions – the three Qs.
• Who is not doing what? (observation)
• So what? (risk)
• How did this happen? (root cause)
This approach strips findings back to three elements without which you sim￾ply cannot have a finding. Including criterion or criteria all too often leads to Findings or observations and recommendations 161
lengthy process descriptions, before eventually allowing the reader to learn 
“who is not doing what.” (Remember the 17 paragraphs of mind-numbing 
detail I mentioned in Chapter 6? It was a process description.) Put yourself 
in your readers’ shoes – why would you want to read so much detail, almost 
all of it unnecessary to understanding the observation?
The fifth C – corrective action – also doesn’t feature in my list of ques￾tions. This is because not all reports include recommendations. Furthermore, 
management action plans require senior managers to create them. It’s rather 
unfair to require the fifth C when many teams will have little or no control 
over it.
This does leave us, though, with the spine of any sound finding: the three 
Qs.
WHO IS NOT DOING WHAT?
This is a simple way to communicate the problem. Someone – usually a 
team, area, or department – is not doing what they should. It could be they 
are not adhering to controls, following instructions, or putting necessary 
processes in place. This also includes doing things they shouldn’t, which 
may seem the opposite of not doing what they should.
However, the latter case is almost always one of violating existing stan￾dards, norms, or controls. So if you say, “Staff members allow unauthorized 
people into the building,” it’s clear to any rational reader that this is a case of 
not following procedures (implied in the word “unauthorized”). The same is 
true with a sentence such as, “The team processes payments over $5,000.00 
without seeking a senior manager’s approval.” Again, it’s clear from the sen￾tence that a senior manager should approve payments over this amount.
A finding can also communicate “What is not in place?” or “What is not 
functioning as it should?” However, someone – a team, department, or 
senior management – is likely responsible for putting something in place, or 
making sure something functions as it should. This is why I use “Who is not 
doing what?” as a way of forcing report-writers to understand who is 
responsible for tasks, systems, or processes. After all, it’s too easy to blame 
a system for not being reliable – but someone is in charge of monitoring and 
maintaining that system. Similarly, instead of saying, “There is no IT secu￾rity governance framework in place,” why not find out which team or com￾mittee was responsible for the task? One finding I read stated bluntly that 
the CISO, who had been in post for over six months, still had not established 
an IT security framework. It was a rare instance of referring to an individu￾al’s role, rather than an area, team, or department. But it communicated the 
problem clearly and concisely.
You will usually provide more information than that in a finding, but the 
single-sentence approach is a necessary start. It tests your information and 
understanding: if you cannot summarize in one sentence “who is not doing 162 Radical Reporting
what,” then you need to reexamine your thinking. If you cannot articulate 
“who is not doing what” in a way that makes it clear what people should be 
doing, revisit your wording. In either case, the active voice will help you.
If you think back to Chapter 4, we looked at how the active voice forces 
us to confront any gaps or assumptions in our research. If all of our notes 
state, “Unauthorized people are allowed into the building,” or “Payments 
over $5,000.00 are processed without a senior manager’s approval,” it’s 
passive, and easy to overlook who is responsible. This isn’t for the purpose 
of blaming people – rather, it’s to see clearly where exactly different pro￾cesses sit and how they work. Without this knowledge, any findings are like 
houses built on shifting sands.
Overusing the passive active voice can also, as we saw in Chapter 4, mis￾lead readers. If you remember the example of the IT services team, the initial 
finding used the active voice, followed by the passive voice. (“The IT Services 
Team does not adhere to Control A. Controls B and C are not adhered to, 
either.”) What the passive voice hid was the “doer” – the reader naturally 
assumed that the IT services team mentioned in the first sentence was 
responsible for the failing mentioned (passively) in the next sentence. As we 
discovered, this was not the case.
Make sure that during your research, investigation, or fieldwork, you 
write as much as possible in the active voice. This will help you see more 
clearly how different tasks, actions, and stages of processes work and 
even fit together. Then, when you start to draft a finding, you do so from 
a position of confidence in your material. You can always soften a mes￾sage later – if necessary.
Why would it be necessary? As Marisa Melliou, quoted in Chapter 4, 
says, blaming individuals rarely helps, so many report-writers avoid using 
active voice for this reason. However, as we’ve seen, reports usually address 
a particular department, area, or even process, involving one or more teams. 
There’s no reason not to mention which team isn’t adhering to standards or 
following processes. After all, the readers know that these are the team or 
teams involved in doing so – why shy away from what should be obvious? 
More to the point, why risk the kind of misunderstanding that the IT 
Services Team example creates?
Many writers choose to risk it – where they are even conscious of doing 
so – because they fear conflict. Again, Chapter 4 addressed this, and the 
extent to which even some communications consultants will encourage 
short-term, high-risk responses such as using the passive voice. It’s often a 
mistake. If we go back to the purpose of reports, it’s to enable readers to do 
something meaningful: either taking action or thinking differently. (The lat￾ter usually enables the former.) If you obscure exactly what the problem is 
– and that’s what you will do if you don’t state “who is not doing what” – 
then your readers can’t respond.Findings or observations and recommendations 163
Three former consultants, Brian Fugere, Chelsea Hardaway, and Jon 
Warshawsky, address the fear of conflict head-on in their book devoted to 
corporate writing pitfalls. In a chapter entitled, “Kick the Happy-Messenger 
Habit,” they exhort corporate writers to “stop tossing the rose petals.”2
Findings are often fertile ground for fallen rose petals, from what I’ve seen. 
Many of them devote at least a third of the text or space to what a team is 
doing well, or how hard staff members have worked, in order to soften the 
blow of the message that their efforts are in vain. This may briefly appease 
some readers, but it can dilute the overall message, leaving the reader wonder￾ing if there even is a problem. I’ve even seen some findings that are not findings 
at all, but simply opportunities to soothe egos by “tossing the rose petals.”
This tendency may be stronger in some sectors than others. Emma Smith, 
Global Security Director at Vodafone, sees a clear difference between reports 
in banking and those in telecommunications. The latter, she says, feature 
“more data and metrics as part of the communication; shorter, more direct 
communication.” Emma knows that a clear message doesn’t come from data 
and metrics alone. Short, clear, concise wording helps your readers make 
sense of it all.
One example, from compliance reporting, shows how even slight wordi￾ness can obscure meaning. The finding stated, “There is a wide range of 
instances of non-compliance in this area.” Given that the report covered 
highly regulated activities within financial services, I was keen to find out 
how wide the range of non-compliance was. How many different types of 
non-compliance were there? I asked the writer, who said the sentence was 
supposed to convey many instances of one type of non-compliance. When I 
pointed out that these are two different problems, the writer was confused. 
“A wide range” or “many” – what was the difference?
If you have a wide range of different instances of non-compliance, there 
must be a problem with the people carrying out these tasks. How else could 
they all get so many different things wrong, repeatedly? You’d need to look 
at recruitment, training, management – all the steps that choose the right 
people and equip them to do the work.
If, however, there is only one thing that the team gets wrong, repeatedly, 
look at that thing. The problem won’t be the people – it will be the processes 
or systems used to perform that task. Using language clearly and concisely 
helps readers understand what the problem is, which is essential to resolving it.
When your findings tell readers what they should be aware of or correct, 
they communicate problems – bad news. However, you will also want to 
point out good things you have discovered during your review or investiga￾tion. When your findings combine good and bad, you must find a way to 
make this clear to your readers. You can do this by labeling them differently 
(“to correct” and “good practice,” for example), or by reflecting the positive 
and negative groups of findings in your report structure. What you cannot 164 Radical Reporting
do is create a reporting layer-cake of good/bad/good/bad/good/bad and 
expect your readers to follow you.
“But the context!” I hear you cry. “We must include context!” Well, what 
do you mean by “context”? If you mean lots of supporting detail, revisit 
Chapters 5 and 6: how much of it is necessary? Can you put what is neces￾sary in an appendix (the attic of your report)? Or must it go in the finding 
itself, risking making it longer and boring the reader?
If, however, by “context,” you mean what I would bluntly call “excuses,” 
then think carefully again about the purpose of the report. It is not a mouth￾piece for departments or areas to explain – often without persuading – why 
they have failed. It is not an opportunity to distract from essential informa￾tion with true but irrelevant details. It is there to document or prompt 
needed action.
This is the angle I’ve used when managers of audited areas have insisted I 
dilute findings with “context.” If the “context” is the fact that an area is 
being restructured, or that two departments are merging, then that informa￾tion belongs in both the terms of reference and the executive summary. It’s 
essential for the reader to understand what is, in such cases, truly context.
However, in most cases, the conversation has gone like this (somewhat 
sharpened and simplified).
MANAGER: I think you’ve left out some important context here. You’re report￾ing only what we haven’t done – the governance framework.
ME: That’s true. What do you think is missing?
MANAGER: Well, I already explained to you that we’ve been working on this 
for six months. I asked for extra resource, so now we have a team of ten 
on it, and we’ve even engaged external consultants to advise us. Don’t 
you remember?
ME: No, I do. I remember you telling me all that.
MANAGER: So why isn’t it in there?
ME: Mmm. Remind me, how much did you spend on the consultants?
MANAGER: Well, yes, we had to ask for extra budget for that…
ME: OK. Let me check I understand. You were supposed to have this in place 
last year, three months after starting. We’re already three months late, 
and the budget exceeded by…I need to recalculate that to include the 
latest consultants’ fees. You’ve also taken on extra staff from other 
departments. And you still don’t have a framework in place. Now, I’m 
perfectly happy to put all of that in the finding for “context,” if you 
insist. But do you really think it will focus readers’ attention on the right 
things? Because, you know, I’m kind of worried it will make things dif￾ficult for you. I can just see different boards and committees demanding 
explanations, which only you can give, and that will take you away 
from your focus. Which is this framework. So what do you think?
[silence]Findings or observations and recommendations 165
MANAGER: No, you’re right, it’s best to keep it simple. We don’t want to clut￾ter the report up with too much detail. I can get the framework in place 
by the end of the quarter.
Keep in mind that by focusing on “who is not doing what,” you aren’t 
blaming a person. You’re defining a problem. “Define the problem and 
you’re halfway to the solution.”3 The solution is ultimately to improve risk 
management and help the organization.
Jeffrey W. Brown, quoted in Chapter 6, sees how too much information, 
poorly articulated, can hinder this objective. Coming from an IT security 
perspective, he reminds his colleagues of the need to keep it simple and 
relevant for readers: “One of the things I like to drive in my team is clear 
communication. It doesn’t matter how smart you are if you can’t get your 
message through to other people. I remind my team to limit technical jar￾gon and try to spend time understanding the businesses we are 
protecting.”
Without understanding the business, you risk producing findings that waste 
time and improve nothing. However, where you work in the organization 
affects your findings. It’s not only national culture (mentioned earlier), but 
also departmental culture that changes focus. Louise McKay, a former inter￾nal auditor, is a director of risk strategy. Whereas now she must report on 
trends and threats across an entire organization, “the challenge in internal 
audit reporting was to communicate detailed findings in a way that showed 
that I fully understood the area I’d reviewed – but also in a way that those 
who are less close to that area could understand the importance of what I’d 
found.” The importance of what you’ve found starts with clearly stating “who 
isn’t doing what” – this alerts readers to the fact that there is a problem. Why 
they should care about it, however, is the second Q: the risk statement.
SO WHAT?
This may seem a flippant question, given how serious the responses often 
are. But it’s a good shortcut to articulate why your readers should care 
about your findings. They should care because, if they don’t address the 
problems you’ve raised, the organization faces risks.
Now, different professions, sectors, organizations, and textbooks define 
the word “risk” differently. How could they not? Below is a selection of a 
few different definitions of the term.
• The Institute of Internal Auditors: “The positive or negative effect of 
uncertainty on objectives.”4
• The Institute of Risk Management: “the combination of the probabil￾ity of an event and its consequences. In all types of undertaking, there 
is the potential for events and consequences that constitute opportuni￾ties for benefit (upside) or threats to success (downside).”5166 Radical Reporting
• PRINCE 2: “an uncertain event or set of events that, should it occur, 
will have an effect on the achievement of objectives. A risk is measured 
by a combination of the probability of a perceived threat or opportu￾nity occurring and the magnitude of its impact on objectives.”6
• ISO 31000-2009: “the effect of uncertainty on objectives”7
• UK Government: “specific uncertainties that arise from activities such 
as forecasting or implementation, the costs of which have been esti￾mated. They are specific to an intervention and may be quantified and 
managed.”8
There are some common points above – the emphasis on achieving objec￾tives, for example. But it’s clear that depending on context and audience, 
there can be wildly differing interpretations of the term “risk.” If you and 
your readers are at cross-purposes when referring to risk, you’re unlikely to 
get the results you need from the report.
Language matters. You need to discuss risk with your colleagues and cli￾ents so that you can agree on a common term. Many people use terms such 
as “impact” or “consequence,” fearing that risk is too emotive. However, 
while something may be an impact, consequence, knock-on effect, repercus￾sion, or fall-out from the problem you’ve observed, it’s not necessarily a risk.
Look at your organization’s risk-appetite statement. Decided by the 
board, it often features in the annual report. Align your work – whether in 
audit, risk, compliance, or IT – to the board’s stated risk appetite or toler￾ance, and your reports will address the risks that most matter.
I’ve found it most useful to think of risks as falling into four main catego￾ries: financial, regulatory, reputational, and health and safety.9 These all 
cover what we can agree are “real-world harms.” When I worked in finance, 
we focused on the first three. The last one often applies to public-sector 
organizations in many countries (with their responsibility for law enforce￾ment, prisons, and often health care) as well as manufacturing (with the risk 
of industrial accidents).
Some risk experts speak of opportunity risks, where an organization 
misses out on “the benefits of speculative opportunities.”10 For example, an 
overly cautious business may be reluctant to enter or expand its place in the 
market. Ultimately, though, opportunity risk maps to financial risk, as the 
business will not make as much profit as its less-cautious rivals. Similarly, 
existential risk – that of an organization ceasing to function – clearly has 
financial and reputational, as well as possible regulatory, risks.
For senior decision-makers and operational managers, financial, regula￾tory, reputational, health and safety, and possibly opportunity risks will cap￾ture their attention. This is because – unlike many, seemingly infinite, 
categories of sub-risks – these five hit the bottom line or the headlines. 
Without being too cynical, I believe readers best grasp risk statements that 
clearly state how the organization will lose money, receive bad press cover￾age, or even be held responsible for someone’s life.Findings or observations and recommendations 167
Most organizations have elaborate and well-thought-out risk categories, 
with numerous sub- and sub-sub-categories. This, they believe, helps them 
define specific risks departments face, and populate risk registers.
However, there is always a danger that by distancing themselves from the 
main categories, people fall into the trap of listing mere effects. Many of 
these will be failed controls – not risks, a point we’ll examine shortly.
Let’s look at two common types of risk cited in reports: cyber or data risk, 
and operational risk. In the first case, a common risk statement is to state the 
type of risk (cyber or data risk), then to elaborate on it, by saying something 
like, “Risk of data breach or loss.”
Now, we all hope that anyone reading this will immediately understand 
why they should take steps to stop this from happening. But mapping this 
risk to one of the main risks – which can differ, depending on context – 
makes it much more tangible for readers.
Let’s imagine a global telecommunications company – a mobile-phone 
giant, for instance. This company’s audit, risk, compliance, or IT security 
team finds poor controls for customers’ personal data. If there is a data 
breach (whether accidental or intentional), the risks are first regulatory. 
Where the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation applies, this could 
entail a fine of €20 million or 4% of the organization’s annual turnover, 
whichever is higher. There is clearly a financial impact, and, if reported in 
the press, reputational. Keeping in mind that GDPR protects EU nationals 
wherever they are in the world, this should focus minds.
Now let’s imagine this same company’s audit, risk, compliance, or IT 
security team has also found poor controls for sensitive proprietary data. 
This data is nothing to do with customers. It’s what the company’s 
research and development team has been working on to create a product 
that will surpass all rivals’ offerings. Is the risk the same? Of course not. 
This time the risk is financial and reputational, in terms of missing an 
opportunity. The Institute of Risk Management definition above refers 
explicitly to the fact that risks can be both negative and positive – you 
can risk something bad happening (downside), or missing out on some￾thing good (upside). No company wants to see its chances of outpacing 
the competition and gaining greater market share escape. Yet that is 
exactly what report-writers need to communicate in this second 
example.
Emma Smith describes well the common failure to link observations to 
risk. “I often see technical people who understand their subject matter strug￾gle to explain risks simply and clearly – to be able to share the ‘So what?,’ 
whether that relates to risks or generally the compelling reason.”
Thinking of “So what?” in terms of the main risk categories set out ear￾lier can also help avoid a mistake many report-writers make in their risk 
statements. Instead of stating a risk, they state a failed control – a different 
one from the initial observation (“Who is not doing what?”), but still a 
failed control.168 Radical Reporting
One example that focuses people’s minds on the difference is the follow￾ing question: “If you’re crossing a busy road, what is the risk?” Many people 
will answer “Not using the pedestrian crossing,” or “Not crossing at the 
lights.” Both are failed controls. The risk is that you’ll be hit by a car and 
injured or worse. Crossing at the lights and using pedestrian crossings are 
controls to mitigate the risk of injury or death.
All functions that help organizations manage risk need to understand 
both risks and failed controls. However, when writing to a deadline, head 
full of detail, it’s easy to confuse the two. For example, perhaps you’ve dis￾covered that one department is using an outdated system for its own man￾agement information (MI). The system doesn’t automatically capture the 
data needed, so staff members must enter it manually. This increases the 
chance of manual error, so managers need to check and double-check both 
the data entered and the outputs. What is the risk? Many reports will refer 
to the department’s MI being late, or containing inaccurate data. Both are 
failed controls. If you ask, “So what?” you will immediately see this. So 
what if the MI is late? So what if it’s inaccurate?
Many teams will simply say “operational risk” or “risk of operational 
inefficiencies.” This may be true, but first, you must understand what the MI 
is for. If it is for internal decision-making about budget, then the risk is dou￾bly financial. First, poor data can lead to poor decision-making, with the 
risk of financial loss. Second, “operational inefficiencies” simply mean 
wasted time and resources, which always costs the organization.
However, if the MI ends up in a regulatory report, the risks are different. 
You still have the wasted time and resources (financial loss), but now you 
must consider the regulatory risks. What happens if the regulator receives 
reports with wrong information? The organization could face regulatory cen￾sure, increased scrutiny (which in turn requires extra time and resource inter￾nally), fines, or even losing the license to operate in certain jurisdictions.
For compliance specialists, the “so what” may appear easy. The risk is of 
non-compliance with a regulation, law, or even organizational policy. 
However, there are ways to make this more useful for readers, who all too 
often see compliance as an internal, box-checking exercise, rather than an 
essential function.
First, look at the purpose of the regulation, law, or policy. It will be a 
directive control, telling people and organizations to do or not do some￾thing. If you can explain to readers why compliance is important – for 
instance, because it protects the organization from going bankrupt, or 
being sued – then they see the broader purpose. Furthermore, articulating 
risk in terms of real-world harms further persuades readers. Saying that 
there is a risk of regulatory censure is one thing; pointing out that a rival 
organization recently paid millions in fines for similar weaknesses is 
another. Keeping abreast of current events means you can paint a picture 
of what happens when organizations breach regulations and laws. Instead 
of generic phrases such as “increased regulatory scrutiny” or “significant Findings or observations and recommendations 169
fines,” you can refer to tangible effects, such as newspaper headlines or 
dollar amounts.
The “so what” must always lead to something worthwhile for the 
readers – not to a list of seemingly trivial internal tasks. No matter how 
technical or complex the finding, you should be able to create a real-life risk 
scenario that is both proportionate and meaningful. Shawn Von Hagen of 
Canada Life refers to it explicitly, when articulating how his team bridges 
technical knowledge with organizational awareness to communicate with 
readers. Knowing what is relevant and keeping it simple are key:
When writing technical audit reports, the team should at a minimum be 
familiar with COSO, COBIT, CIS and NIST. I always remind the team 
to know your audience and ensure that you have the business so what
clearly articulated. When communicating a message, fewer words are 
better than more.11
Marisa Melliou echoes the importance of understanding the link between 
findings and objectives. “Remember to keep coming back to strategic objec￾tives. Create value, business interest, and engagement by ensuring that audit 
objectives, audit programs, and report findings are always aligned to busi￾ness objectives.”
It’s necessary, but not sufficient, to articulate “who is not doing what” and 
answer the question “So what?.” For any report to communicate what can 
change, we have to include information that enables managers to correct 
problems. For that, we need the root cause.
HOW DID THIS HAPPEN?
This is where we discuss the cause of the observation. What happened to 
create the situation described in the finding, where people aren’t doing what 
they should, or doing what they shouldn’t? It’s essential to discover this 
so that we can make sensible, sustainable, meaningful recommendations. 
Otherwise, the organization will never address what is causing problems. 
Existing problems will persist or recur, and new problems arise.
It seems obvious, yet many assurance functions fail to articulate any sort 
of true root cause of the problems they report. Whether in audit, risk, com￾pliance, or IT, most reports either overlook root cause or simply restate the 
problem.
In November 2020, I spoke at an event for chief audit executives. The 
topic was root-cause analysis, and most of them complained bitterly that 
their teams were terrible at articulating root cause in findings. When I asked 
how many of their report templates specifically asked for root cause in the 
findings section, they suddenly went silent. The answer was that few of 
them had asked their teams for the information, but blamed them for not 
providing it!170 Radical Reporting
Many people will say that they consider root cause as part of their investi￾gations, research, or fieldwork. If this is true, then why isn’t this crucial infor￾mation making its way through to the reports? I think the answer is twofold. 
First, templates: if a template doesn’t ask for information, few people will 
volunteer it. On the other hand, if a template asks for lots of other informa￾tion, less relevant to the topic, people usually provide it without question. 
Badly designed templates have a lot to answer for, not least their role in giving 
report-writers an excuse for not thinking through what belongs in the report.
The second reason is that far too many people don’t work all the way 
through to root cause. They may be satisfied with a circular or superficial 
explanation: “They’re not following the process because, well, they’re just not. 
They must be lazy.” “The managers aren’t reviewing their teams’ work because 
they say they haven’t had time.” None of this is worthy of the term root cause. 
It fills space on the page, but doesn’t fulfill any function. Come the follow-up, 
or the next review, you will find the same problems you found this time.
Root-cause analysis means persisting in peeling away layers of informa￾tion to get to the true source of the problem. Some people use what they call 
“the five ‘whys’,” channeling their inner four-year-old. “Why did this hap￾pen? And why did that happen? And why? Why? Why?” It’s demanding but 
effective. I’ve found that using the draft outline as an aide-mémoire (as sug￾gested in Chapter 5) can prompt senior managers to start discussing root 
cause. Open-ended questions such as, “And why do you think that hap￾pened?,” “What do you suspect caused that?,” or even “Can you tell me how 
you think that came about?” often encourage people to share their theories 
and insights, all of which are useful in explaining how situations arise.
One of the most interesting results of examining root cause is discovering 
common themes or trends. For instance, in the following mind map, there 
are four findings, all with the same root cause.
Risk
Finding 
2
Finding 
3 Root 
cause
Finding 
4
Finding 
1
Risk
Risk
Risk
Root
cause
Root
cause
Root 
causeFindings or observations and recommendations 171
The obvious next step would be to see if you can combine all four find￾ings into one. In this case, a team wasn’t adhering to four different con￾trols. The manager explained that the reason why was that he hadn’t sent 
them for training. So on the face of it, lack of training is the shared root 
cause. However, combining all four findings into one gives a new, bigger 
finding: The team has not received training in key controls. After listing 
the risks, we come to root cause – why hadn’t the manager sent the team 
on the training? Depending on the answer, you will probably have to ask 
more questions – and will definitely come up with different 
recommendations.
• The manager says he hasn’t sent them on the training because the 
training is outdated and doesn’t teach them what they need to know. 
This may be true – in which case, the training is an inadequate control. 
(If this is so, you should already have discovered this during your ini￾tial research. What’s more, normally you wouldn’t then proceed to test 
effectiveness. Why test how well an inadequate control works, after 
all? But I digress.) Why hasn’t the manager put corrective controls in 
place, such as training people himself? Did he try to, but was stopped? 
If so, by whom? Why?
• The manager says he hasn’t sent them on the training because turnover 
in the team is high, so it would be a waste of money. Why is the turno￾ver high? Are there cultural or behavioral problems in the team? If so, 
what is the manager doing about it? Is he a problem? And why doesn’t 
he understand the risks of not sending people on training?
• The manager says he hasn’t sent them on the training because he can’t 
afford to have even one person absent – there is too much work. Why? 
Is he managing resources badly? If so, why? Has he been overpro￾moted, or not received training himself? Or have his superiors given 
him too much to do without the proper resources? If so, why? Don’t 
they understand the consequences?
You can see how even three scenarios can lead us into multiple lines of 
inquiry. Pursuing them, asking “the five ‘whys’,” peeling that onion, 
will eventually lead you to the true root cause, which is often cultural or 
behavioral. Even a list of seemingly minor findings – items “on the back 
burner,” of low priority – may indicate a serious underlying problem: bul￾lying, for instance, or incompetence at senior levels. Root-cause analysis 
can help you identify and resolve those problems before they lead to major 
incidents.
After all, items left on the back burner too long can still catch fire.
Without discovering and articulating root cause, findings will not lead to 
lasting action. Your reader should be able to follow a golden thread of logic 172 Radical Reporting
and coherence from the observation (“Who is not doing what?”), through 
the risk (“So what?”) to the root cause (“Why?”) and ultimately your rec￾ommendation. If you skip root cause, your reader may well look at your 
recommendation and ask, “What exactly is the problem this is designed to 
solve?”
It’s not simply about fixing a one-off problem, either. It’s about resolving 
it for good, and reducing the chance of other problems springing from the 
same source. Imagine that a ceiling in your house is leaking. You need to find 
the source of that leak: is it from a damaged water pipe, or a missing tile on 
the roof? Once you find where the problem is, you stop that leak and pre￾vent further ones. If, however, you simply spray an anti-damp product on 
the ceiling, or place a bucket under the leak, you’ve solved nothing. The 
problem will inevitably worsen. Findings without root-cause analysis are 
exactly that – saying, “Oh, there’s a leak,” placing a bucket under it, and 
walking away.
Another way to think of root cause is to imagine it as an illness, with find￾ings as symptoms. If you go to the doctor because you have headaches, a 
tingling or painful feeling in a patch of skin, and a rash, you want him or her 
to tell you why. The diagnosis – shingles – is the root cause.
If you find yourself reviewing large strategic projects, using mind maps 
can help you discover bigger root causes than you may expect. A typical 
example will be where your findings include:
• no one signed off the final draft of the terms of reference;
• as a result, roles and responsibilities are unclear;
• reporting lines are consequently muddled;
• MI is contradictory and often repetitive;
• no one has received training; and
• communications are sporadic and poor.
If you list these on a Word document, it can be easy to see them as discrete 
failures or weaknesses in project management. But mind-mapping can some￾times open your eyes to the shared root cause – lack of governance – which 
is the major problem. The next step is to ask why there’s no governance for 
such an important project. However technical a topic or activity, ultimately 
the root cause will be cultural or behavioral. Senior decision-makers either 
don’t understand the risks involved – in which case, why are they in sen￾ior positions? – or understand them but don’t care. Again, why would an 
organization promote such people? Especially in a technical context, these 
important points can disappear in a mass of data.
Jeffrey W. Brown sees this first hand in his work as a cybersecurity expert. 
“Security professionals share whatever information they can find or what￾ever is easy to compile. They provide way too much data and they don’t 
provide enough business context around what the data means.” Just as Findings or observations and recommendations 173
many auditors from accountancy backgrounds seek comfort in numbers, IT 
professionals rely on the data to speak for them. But, according to Brown, 
this overlooks what readers want and need. Most executives, he says,
want answers to simple questions like are they secure and how do 
they compare with their industry peers. They want to know what they 
should be worried about, and they want to make sure their critical busi￾ness processes are not impacted by a cyber event. Instead, they end up 
getting a lot of acronyms and technical jargon thrown at them. When 
you tailor your message to things that they care about, you can make a 
much better connection between security and the business. Understand 
your audience first and then tailor your message.
Finally, he says, “You’ll need to make sure you’re measuring the right things, 
not just the things that are easy to measure.”
The security awareness professional cited in Chapter 6 echoes Brown’s 
views while contrasting the approaches to technical findings. Speaking of 
analytical reports, this expert says that
Often, reporting was heavily based on facts (events, people, dates, 
etc.), but limited “meaning” or foresight. This meant the reporting 
was akin to telling the news, rather than giving a decision-maker the 
possible foresight he or she required. Many analysts found “predict￾ing” daunting and were reluctant to do so. Also, following the Chilcot 
Inquiry after the Iraq war, many analytical teams would stick to the 
facts in order to “stay safe” when writing. This potentially has led to 
a reduction in foresight being provided to decision-makers. It leaves 
the “sense-making” and deductions to them, rather than to the team 
providing the report.
How many reports can you recall that conveyed the right things to the right 
people in the right way? If they didn’t, the problem probably started at the 
planning stage. However, our old companions – habit, tiredness, and fear 
– conspire against taking that step back, out of our comfort zone. Planning 
rigorously means that the testing, investigation, and research you do will be 
in the areas that most need it. Your findings will therefore be relevant and 
useful to your readers – but only if you convey them concisely.
It’s often difficult to do so, especially if you’ve spent weeks or months 
working on a particular audit, review, or investigation. As we said in Chapter 
5, planning techniques are essential for us to see clearly all the information 
in our heads, before we select and order it to best effect. One factor that 
more and more heads of department are admitting to is that people often 
don’t complete their fieldwork or research before arriving at their conclu￾sions. Since 2014, several heads of audit, risk, and compliance have told me 174 Radical Reporting
that it is only when they see draft reports, and ask basic questions, that gaps 
in knowledge, testing, and analysis become apparent.
Oleksandr Tytkovskyi is Director of the Internal Audit Department of the 
Ministry of Defense of Ukraine – you can imagine how important his team’s 
reports are. Like auditors the world over, he is alert to the causes of poor 
reporting. The first cause, he says, is low quality of the actual internal audit 
work itself. This ties in exactly with what the heads of audit were discover￾ing late in the review process, as described above.
Poor-quality work, whether in audit, risk, compliance, or IT, can have 
many different causes. Tytkovskyi is open and comprehensive in his list of 
possible root causes:
insufficient professional competence (lack of professional knowledge, 
skills and abilities); low motivation; propensity to commit acts of cor￾ruption; culture of poor behavior; adherence to outdated stereotypes; 
unclear and overly formal articulation of recommendations and pro￾posals; and the inability to think creatively.
(I think it’s inspiring that people from two fields often thought of as lacking 
in creativity – the military and IT – should stress its importance of crea￾tivity. Tytkovskyi here echoes Komitas Stepanyan’s belief that we should 
think and act creatively, to have greater insight and communicate more 
effectively.)
This brings us back to the human element: creativity, but also culture and 
behavior. People may like to cite data and statistics to stay “safe,” but with￾out answering the three Qs, findings are meaningless. The only way you will 
be able to answer the three Qs is by asking them, or even more creative 
questions, and listening to the answers. Margaret McCaig is Global Head of 
Regulatory Compliance, Conduct and Legal Audit at a major international 
bank. She thinks one of the pitfalls of reporting is “too much background 
information, too much minutia.” However, the wealth of detail doesn’t reas￾sure readers – report gradings can lead to resistance. “If red, there’s push￾back – sometimes even amber prompts it. Materiality of issues can also be 
an area that is often challenged.”
Bombarding readers with data doesn’t mean you’ll persuade them. If you 
haven’t stated clearly what the problem, risk, and root cause are, you’re not 
serving your readers. If you leap to recommendations that are “quick fixes” 
senior managers will accept, you may be leaving massive gaps in the organi￾zation’s risk and control framework.
Even specialists in IT security can lose sight of the “big picture.” Professor 
Dan Shoemaker is Senior Research Scientist at the Center for Cyber Security 
and Intelligence Studies, University of Detroit Mercy, and 2021–2023 
Distinguished Visitor at the IEEE Computer Society. He has an image few of 
us will forget when he talks about reports.Findings or observations and recommendations 175
Far too many of the things I see are overfocused on the belly-button lint 
and miss the strategic point. There is a lot of designing of “solutions” 
in cybersecurity. These more or less protect some aspect without even 
considering any other (potentially easy) method of attack. The fact is 
that you really aren’t secure if you aren’t secure. So a report that con￾centrates on one of the three attack surfaces (for instance electronic) 
while ignoring the other two (human or physical) is a waste of time and 
money. My friends in the hacker community are looking for the gaps in 
the defense – not where your fortifications are.
Focusing on the three Qs – “Who is not doing what? So what? How did 
this happen?” – will prove that you indeed have a finding to report. Keep 
in mind, though, that a good report is one that conveys relevant, useful 
information. Resist the temptation to overstate findings, just as you should 
resist pressure to understate them. Everyone faces the “pushback” Margaret 
McCaig refers to; making sure that we have something that presents an 
actual risk helps persuade managers of the need to address it.
It’s equally important to acknowledge when a failure or weakness isn’t 
material. This shows clients, colleagues, and other parts of the organization 
that a finding isn’t about “catching people out.” It’s about reporting what is 
truly relevant to the organization, to help it manage risks. Exaggerating or 
minimizing findings risks damaging your credibility and the organization’s 
success.
This takes us back to points made in previous chapters. Clear, open com￾munication helps at all stages leading up to the report, reduces conflict, and 
improves relationships. I’ve already mentioned using a draft outline as an 
aide-mémoire to draw other people out and encourage them to share infor￾mation – having a “deskside” manner, much as a doctor has a bedside 
manner.
Maybe you are uncertain about this less formal approach, but profession￾als across the world have found that regular, often informal communication 
leads to better results. “We don’t have a specific style of communication,” 
says Ola Bello.
The internal audit team is really close, and there are regular engage￾ments and feedback within the team, so we naturally apply a similar 
approach to communicating with others without having something for￾malized. Our style is working collaboratively, and we have built good 
relationships over time with similar stakeholders.
Nino Karazanashvili introduced a different way of communicating into her 
team – one that prioritized regular, open discussions with senior managers 
across the organization. The senior managers, she said,176 Radical Reporting
saw this change and were surprised by the frequent meetings, and by 
our showing how we do our work, to make it more understandable 
for them. The internal audit team, as part of this process, saw the pos￾itive sides of being open in communication, which I think increased 
their motivation and responsibility. As for the management, it was a 
completely different approach to communication – even a bit “shock￾ing.” But it lowered negative attitudes towards internal audit.
With this approach, you can understand and incorporate senior managers’ 
insights into your work as you go along. It’s not about allowing them to 
dictate your work. Rather, it’s about working with them collaboratively to 
produce the most accurate and relevant information. You may still have dis￾agreements, but it should be easier to discuss and resolve them, building on 
the conversations you’ve already had. Many teams include a section entitled 
“management comments” or “management response” in individual find￾ings. This is a good way to ensure senior managers have their say, without 
diluting or otherwise changing your findings.
Rather than doing all this hard work, though, maybe you’d rather hand it 
all over to an LLM, as mentioned in earlier chapters. As we have seen repeat￾edly, though, outsourcing our responsibility for thinking clearly and using 
plain language is not an option. Nor is overlooking what could be consider￾able legal and reputational risks if we use LLMs without controls over con￾fidential data and the quality of the output. In a fascinating case study, Scott 
A. Emett, Marc Eulerich, Egemen Lipinksi, Nicolo Prien, and David A. 
Wood examined how one company’s internal audit function used AI while 
controlling security risks. As Alee Marschke summarizes, 
To address security concerns, Uniper’s information security department 
provided oversight of the audit, the company IP address was not used, 
and no personal or company data was used. The auditors did not pro￾vide full texts to ChatGPT. Instead, they used fragments of writing with 
ChatGPT and manually pieced the responses together.12
Writing a good finding is simple, but not easy. If you can’t answer the 
three Qs, you either don’t have a finding, or haven’t finished your review. If 
senior managers disagree with your finding but cannot give any factual rea￾son why, you will be on stronger ground if you’ve answered the three Qs. If 
they still disagree, you can invite them to add “management comments.” But 
you will know you have findings that were worth discovering and are worth 
addressing.
As Emma Smith says, “Explain risk in real customer and business terms. 
Remove jargon. Remove or explain acronyms. Put yourself in their shoes. 
Use story telling. Data wins arguments. Be an enabler, not a blocker.”
Now you’re ready to write your executive summary.Findings or observations and recommendations 177
ACTIVITY
Choose one of the case studies below and, with the limited (and sometimes 
confusing) information available, answer the following questions. Try not to 
write more than three sentences for each answer.
• Who is not doing what?
• So what?
• Why did this happen?
OPTION 1:
The process for selecting third-party suppliers is not formally documented. 
Management stated that as the division is a regulated function, all managers 
are aware of the importance of complying with agreed principles. Paperwork 
around suppliers chosen in the past provided to Audit showed consistency 
across the division, but there is no reference to Group policy. As it is a small 
function, staff members are told about processes in regular meetings (not 
minuted).
OPTION 2:
Data showed that 32% of staff members have IT privileges that enable them 
to access the sales database remotely (from a PC at home). Company policy 
is for managers to review access quarterly, even when there is high turnover. 
Approximately half of the managers do this, with the remaining 52% review￾ing it annually (27%) or having no records of ever doing so (25%). This last 
group of managers could not confirm whether access for former staff had been 
removed, and there has been tracking of access from non-company laptops.
SUMMARY
• Any report will convey findings or observations, also called “issues,” “key 
points,” and even “weaknesses.” The point of findings may be to docu￾ment agreed action or to prompt recommended action. Structuring your 
findings to order information from broadest to most detailed will help 
meet these different readers’ needs.
• One common approach in internal audit is the five Cs: criteria (or cri￾terion, if singular), condition, consequence, cause, and corrective action.
• I suggest a simpler approach, which works for different types of reports, 
as well as business cases. Rather than the five Cs, it prompts the three 
Qs (questions):178 Radical Reporting
ACTIVITY – SUGGESTED ANSWERS
OPTION 1:
• Who is not doing what? This division does not have a documented, 
approved process for selecting third-party suppliers.
• So what? The organization risks:
• financial loss from poor value for money from suppliers who do not 
deliver quality products or services;
• financial loss from legal action from unsuccessful suppliers, who may 
have grounds to sue if they discover that a non-existent process 
disadvantaged them;
• reputational damage if suppliers have been chosen because of family 
or other connections;
• regulatory censure in countries where private companies must com￾ply with procurement law;
• financial loss from inefficient use of resources (having to inform new 
and existing staff about the process verbally and informally instead of 
referring them to a single document).
• Why did this happen? It appears to be cultural – a small, tight-knit team 
specializing in a particular area may often feel they do not need to docu￾ment what they do. Some of them may view the recommendation to do 
so as an insult to their knowledge and integrity. Others may simply have 
overlooked the need to document a process, believing that their existing 
arrangements were sufficient.
Original text with my commentary in bold:
The process for selecting third-party suppliers is not formally documented. 
Note the passive voice. Management stated that as the division is a regulated 
function, all managers are aware of the importance of complying with agreed 
principles. This is a common excuse: “Because it’s so important, we 
• “Who is not doing what?” (observation)
• “So what?” (risk)
• “How did this happen?” (root cause)
• This approach works well because if you cannot answer even one of the 
questions clearly and succinctly, you may not have a finding.
• When articulating risk, it is crucial not to fall into the temptation of con￾fusing risks with failed controls.
• Root-cause analysis is essential for understanding underlying problems 
and making worthwhile recommendations.Findings or observations and recommendations 179
ACTIVITY – SUGGESTED ANSWERS
OPTION 2:
• Who is not doing what? Managers are not reviewing staff IT privileges 
quarterly to restrict access to only those staff needing it.
• So what? The organization risks financial loss, since former – or exist￾ing – staff could disclose sensitive commercial information to competi￾tors. If the information contains customers’ or staff members’ personal 
data, there is also regulatory risk. Both situations could also damage the 
organization’s reputation.
• Why did this happen? It may be due to high turnover – we need more 
information. If the turnover affects only non-managers, managers may 
think it a waste of time to check access quarterly. If the turnover 
affects managers, too, then perhaps they have not received the neces￾sary training.
Original text with my commentary in bold:
Data showed that 32% of staff members have IT privileges that enable them to 
access the sales database remotely (from a PC at home). Ideally, we’d have 
more information here; it sounds like 32% of all staff, which could be 
the sales force. Or it could be 32% of staff in areas that don’t need 
to access the sales database. Company policy is for managers to review 
access quarterly, even when there is high turnover. This is interesting – why 
don’t even need to document it – we live and breathe it!” This isn’t 
good enough. Paperwork around suppliers chosen in the past provided to 
Audit showed consistency across the division, but there is no reference to 
Group policy. Did you spot the trap? Just because something is con￾sistent doesn’t mean it’s good. It could be consistently bad. Also, have 
we checked that Group Policy’s advice on this topic is consonant 
with current legal and regulatory requirements? It’s no good having 
something in place that is compliant with a poor policy. As it is a small 
function, staff members are told about processes in regular meetings (not min￾uted). This is usually a sign a team is deliberately hiding information, 
or too casual about the need to document decisions and communi￾cations. Follow up.180 Radical Reporting
NOTES
1 Richard Chambers, “Internal Auditors: It’s What You Say – AND How You 
Say It!,” “Chambers on Internal Audit,” July 26, 2021, www.richardchambers.
com/internal-auditors-its-what-you-say-and-how-you-say-it/; Norman Marks, 
“Let’s talk about audit reporting,” “Norman Marks on Governance, Risk 
Management, and Audit,” July 26, 2021, https://normanmarks.wordpress.com/
category/risk-2/
2 Why Business People Speak Like Idiots: A Bullfighter’s Guide (New York: Free 
Press, 2005), 105.
3 Pressfield, Nobody, 33.
4 The Global Internal Audit StandardsTM (Lake Mary, FL, 2024), 13, www.theiia.
org/globalassets/site/standards/editable-versions/globalinternalauditstandards_
2024january9_editable.pdf
5 A Risk Management Standard, 2002, 2, www.theirm.org/media/4709/
arms_2002_irm.pdf
6 Prince2wiki, https://prince2.wiki/theme/risk/
7 International Standards Organization, 31000:2018, 2018, ISO 31000:2018(en), 
Risk management — Guidelines. See also UK Government, Orange Book: 
Management of Risk – Principles and Concepts (2020), 40, www.gov.uk/
government/publications/orange-book
8 The Green Book, 2020. www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-green￾book-appraisal-and-evaluation-in-central-governent/the-green-book-2020. See 
also UK Government, “Communicating Risk Guidance,” 2011, https://assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/60907/communicating-risk-guidance.pdf
emphasize “even when there is high turnover”? When I have seen 
this in fieldwork notes, it indicates the team or division in question 
has a history of using high turnover as an excuse not to perform cru￾cial controls. Approximately half of the managers do this, with the remaining 
52% reviewing it annually (27%) or having no records of ever doing so (25%). 
This last group of managers could not confirm whether access for former staff 
had been removed, and there has been tracking of access from non-company 
laptops. The syntax in this sentence is poor and therefore misleading. 
Does it mean the last group of managers couldn’t confirm whether 
there has been tracking of access from non-company laptops? Or 
that they couldn’t confirm whether access for former staff had been 
removed – but that there has indeed been tracking of access from 
non-company laptops? I think it’s the former, as surely the latter 
would have included a statement about tracking results.Findings or observations and recommendations 181
9 Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors, “Writing about risk” (technical guidance), 
reviewed 2020, www.iia.org.uk/resources/risk-management/writing-about-risk/
10 Paul Hopkin, Fundamentals of Risk Management: Understanding, evaluating 
and implementing effective risk management. 4th ed. (London: Kogan Page, 
2017), 440. Hopkin’s book, which is the study text for the Institute of Risk 
Management in the UK, sets out compliance, hazard, control, and opportunity 
risks.
11 See also Benjamin Power, “Writing Good Risk Statements,” ISACA Journal 
Archives, May 1, 2014, www.isaca.org/resources/isaca-journal/past-issues/ 
2014/writing-good-risk-statements and Ian Cooke, “IS Audit Basics: The 
Components of the IT Audit Report,” ISACA Journal, January 1, 2020, 
www.isaca.org/resources/isaca-journal/issues/2020/volume-1/is-audit-basics￾the-components-of-the-it-audit-report
12 Emmett, Scott A., Marc Eulerich, Egemen Lipinski, Nicolo Prien, and David A. 
Wood, “Leveraging ChatGPT for Enhancing the Internal Audit Process – A Real￾World Example from a Large Multinational Company” (July 18, 2023). Available 
at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514238 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.4514238 and Marschke, 9-10.182 DOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-11
Chapter 8
Executive summaries
We come now to executive summaries – or, depending on your organization 
or team’s approach, conclusions, key messages, opinion, or other terms. 
Whatever you call it, this part of the report encapsulates its message. It’s 
similar to the headline, sub-heading, and first paragraph of a newspaper 
article, and serves a similar purpose.
Sawyer’s Internal Auditing describes executive summaries in a way that 
applies to all reports – not only internal audit ones.
Summaries come in many shapes and sizes. A summary may be a simple 
transmittal memorandum that sends the report to the president or other 
executives of the organization. Properly drafted, such a summary may 
be ideal for harried, harassed executives who want to read no more 
than they have to while reserving the right to dip into pertinent detail.1
For this reason, I’ll use the term “executive summary,” as it handily refers 
to both the most senior audience (executive) and the need for brevity 
(summary).
This chapter will explore the needs and expectations of those who rely on 
executive summaries. Who are your readers, and what do they want from 
executive summaries? It will suggest ways to meet those needs and expecta￾tions, as well as alert you to common misunderstandings and pitfalls when 
writing executive summaries. Finally, it will discuss common, often emotive, 
responses readers may have, and how to anticipate and manage them. You 
will also see real-life examples and a suggested outline, complete with 
prompts, to help you draft your report.
AUDIENCE AND PURPOSE
Who reads executive summaries, why, and in what context? The above 
quote from Sawyer indicates partial answers to these questions. The most 
senior people in your organization will read them, but so will many others. 
It’s difficult to imagine why an operational manager, for example, would Executive summaries 183
skip straight to the detailed findings without reading the executive summary 
first.
Remember the point made in Chapter 6, which stated that most people 
rarely read beyond the executive summary. This brings us to the answer to 
“Why?”: because the executive summary contains the most important infor￾mation, without going into detail. It is akin to reading the first paragraph of 
a newspaper article – it should give you a good idea of the main message, 
but not force you to read the entire article unless you need or want to.
The one-page reports referred to in Chapter 6 should encourage excellent 
executive summaries. This, however, requires report-writers to step back 
from the detail of their findings and identify the common themes that run 
through them. So, if you find that poor governance or culture underpins 
what you have discovered, the executive summary is where you say so. You 
may expect executives, with their collective experience and intelligence, to 
infer from findings what the “big picture” is. However, even if that were 
true, it’s not their job to do so – it’s the report-writers’. Professor Dan 
Shoemaker reminds us that “most of organizational theory is oriented 
toward getting relevant information off the operational areas and up to the 
top.” Report-writers best do this by delivering not only relevant information 
but also the conclusions drawn from it.
If newspaper article analogies don’t work for you, consider a different one: 
a lawyer’s opening statement to the court. In this instance, the lawyer will set 
out his or her position, supported by high-level evidence. “I will demonstrate 
to the court that my client is innocent of the charges, because he has a strong 
alibi, the forensic evidence is weak, and the witnesses against him are biased.” 
In one sentence, you have the lawyer’s executive summary, as it were. Cross￾examination of expert witnesses – the detailed findings – comes later.
Ask any executive, or anyone who regularly reports direct to executives, 
and they will tell you the same thing: keep it simple, keep it short. I men￾tioned in Chapter 3 the CEO who said, “If you can’t tell me what’s happen￾ing in half a sheet of paper, then either you don’t know, or you’re trying to 
hide something.” He had concluded that lengthy, wordy reports were a sign 
something was badly wrong in the team producing them – and that is often 
the case. However, even more often, people wrongly think that the more 
detail they give, the more they help the reader. As we saw in Chapter 6, 
structuring the report to include detail later in the report frees up the execu￾tive summary to do what it should: summarize for executives. Jane Bettany 
of Frontline AIDS says,
Decision-makers want clarity – what is the report for, what is the deci￾sion to be made, and what are the options. I’ve seen very long reports 
where I get to the end and don’t understand what the reason for the 
paper is, or what decision is required. Pitch the report at the right level 
with the right amount of detail. If you give them too much detail, they 
will interrogate it at that level and get lost in the mire.184 Radical Reporting
Moreover, as she points out, not all executives or committee members share 
the same level of information about or involvement in the organization. 
Frontline AIDS is a charity, and the board members are voluntary trus￾tees. As in any organization, some are experienced executives, others new 
to being on a board. “This means that we get a really independent view 
and fresh pair of eyes and can bring in expertise,” says Bettany. “But it also 
means that pitching the information at the right level is again challenging. 
Executives need to have enough information to understand the organization 
and the question at hand, but not too much to get bogged down in opera￾tional detail. It’s a tightrope walk.”2
Readers of compliance reports are no different. “Senior executives want 
to understand if their risk and control environment is operating effectively, 
and, if not, how material are the deficiencies, and what are the potential 
consequences,” says Margaret McCaig. “Some people want to justify their 
work by putting in a lot of detail on what they’ve tested and how they 
tested, but in my view, do senior executives really care? My view is that 
reports should be as short and easily digestible as possible.”
You may think that IT or cybersecurity reports should allow more detail 
in the executive summary, since many readers are not technical experts. 
However, Connecticut State CISO Jeffrey W. Brown differs. Recall his point 
from Chapter 7:
In the case of most executives, they want answers to simple questions 
such as, are they secure, and how do they compare with their industry 
peers. They want to know what they should be worried about and they 
want to make sure their critical business processes are not impacted by 
a cyber event. Instead, they end up getting a lot of acronyms and tech￾nical jargon thrown at them.
The key is to bridge the gap between the technical data and the busi￾ness’s needs. “When you tailor your message to things that they actually 
care about,” Brown continues, “you can make a much better connection 
between security and the business. Understand your audience first and then 
tailor your message. The rest will come easily.”3
Some organizations anticipate gaps between writers’ and readers’ under￾standing before reporting. Emma Smith at Vodafone describes how her 
teams work with board members to deepen understanding and set expecta￾tions. “Our board wants a tangible view of residual risk,” she says.
They want to know where the specific risks are and how we are 
working to reduce them. We use some training called the Cyber 
Series to make cyber real for our board and go through specific con￾trols – the idea being they better understand how we manage the 
risk. They also visited our Cyber Defence Centre and spent a half 
day with the teams.Executive summaries 185
This may be the ideal, which not all organizations can achieve. However, 
understanding what executives need and want from reporting – which may 
be different things – is every report-writer’s responsibility. Mark Carawan 
sets it out clearly when he says,
I largely believe that what the board committees tend to want is what 
they need. I see the challenge being that there is a gap between what 
the board committees want and need, and what management wants to 
give the board and board committees. Management understandably is 
inclined to celebrate successes, defend positions taken, and elaborate 
on extenuating circumstances, mitigants and external factors that have 
frustrated internal strategies and tactics. Management needs to show 
constraint in overwhelming boards and board committees with what 
management wants to provide, and to focus on what the board wants 
and needs.
The next section will focus on how to meet your readers’ needs through 
constructing concise yet powerful executive summaries.
MEETING YOUR AUDIENCE’S NEEDS: WHAT TO INCLUDE 
IN AN EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Many people ask how long an executive summary should be. One rule of 
thumb is no more than 10% of the entire report. So a 20-page report could 
tolerate a two-page executive summary, in theory, and I have seen effective 
examples of this. However, my view is that people’s attention spans are 
short – if you can keep the executive summary to one page, all the better. 
Every time someone turns a physical page of a document, it breaks the flow. 
A one-page summary – or an effective one-page report – is likelier to capture 
and keep the reader’s attention.
Could your executive summary be even shorter? One chief audit execu￾tive (CAE) I knew would ask his team to email him final reports at attach￾ments, with a two- or three-sentence summary in the body of the email. His 
point was that many senior readers received emails on handheld devices. If 
they could get the gist of the results without having to scroll down or open 
attachments, they were happy. It saved them time: they knew within seconds 
whether they had to download the report securely or could wait until later.
Once his team had provided two- to three-sentence summaries for each 
audit, the CAE would challenge them further. “If you can do this,” he would 
say, “then why do I have to read long executive summaries?” The answer was 
that he didn’t. However, we all know how easy it is to get into bad habits, 
such as including unnecessary detail in executive summaries. The CAE’s team 
took the point and started producing executive summaries that really were
executive summaries. This was a perfect example of the writers – internal 186 Radical Reporting
audit – thinking of the readers, tailoring communications accordingly, and 
saving time. Ideally, a one-pager will do the same thing.
But what do you write in this miracle of conciseness? Just as I suggested 
three questions for findings (“Who is not doing what? So what? Why did 
this happen?”), I suggest two for executive summaries:
• What is the single most important message?
• How have you left matters with the client, business area, or senior 
management?
The first question appears simple until I challenge you to articulate it in a 
sentence. At this point, many of you will realize how often your “executive 
summaries” are merely condensed lists of findings. In other words, they 
repeat symptoms without giving a diagnosis. One head of internal audit 
proudly told me that he instructed his teams to copy and paste the detailed 
findings into the executive summary section of the template. They then 
whittled them down until they fit into three pages. Unsurprisingly, there was 
no single, overarching theme, message, or diagnosis. His team’s executive 
summaries didn’t do their job.
If you summarize your view of a client’s or business area’s control frame￾work, the result will necessarily be high-level. I don’t mean a boilerplate 
phrase such as, “Our opinion for this area/process [delete as appropriate] is: 
no/limited/reasonable/substantial [select one] assurance.” Nor do I mean the 
color-coded rating many teams use.
What I mean is what you would say to the chief executive/head of the 
audit or risk committee/chief compliance officer/CISO [select one] if you 
found yourself in an elevator with him or her. Imagine that a senior person 
asks you for a quick update. It could be something like:
• “This area has worked hard, but still does not have an IT security 
framework in place.”
• “This team relies on manual controls for 85% of processes, which 
creates a higher-than-acceptable risk of error.”
• “The department has outsourced three of its five highest-risk clients to 
a third party without due diligence.”
• “Staff members aren’t aware of their responsibilities in avoiding data 
breaches through simple daily IT security controls.”
• “Many senior managers have left, leaving gaps in knowledge and 
experience, with serious consequences for compliance.”
You may at first think these look like findings because they are concrete. 
However, each one will have been based on multiple findings, all tending 
toward the same conclusion: a simple sentence such as those above.
It’s not easy to do this – you have to make sure your findings are sound 
and that your root-cause analysis is in place. You also need a good dose of Executive summaries 187
courage to deliver what is usually bad news. However, these elements, com￾bined with the ABCs covered in Chapter 4, will impress your most senior 
decision-makers far more than any detail. They appreciate that you will 
have all the data, test results, observations, and other fieldwork evidence to 
hand in order to arrive at your conclusion. They’ll appreciate even more the 
fact that you summarized it so concisely for them.
A simple executive summary requires detailed groundwork, but is exactly 
what readers need. According to Paul Breach of the London Stock Exchange 
Group,
There is considerable focus on being concise. In fact I’ve heard the 
comment that board and senior committee papers need to read “like 
the front page of The Sun,”4 by which people mean that there is an 
attention-grabbing headline and very little need to read many words 
thereafter to explain a given point. I think senior decision-makers want 
to get to the point quickly. A paragraph of context to get people “into 
the zone” at the start is probably fine, but the conclusions, in order of 
importance, need to arrive quickly thereafter.
If you meet the challenge of summarizing your conclusion in one sentence, 
you could add a few more sentences. However, the moment you get into 
detail that belongs in a finding, you’ve gone too far. Broader points that set 
the scene and allow readers to appreciate the importance of your conclu￾sions are more useful. Mark Carawan says,
I have always found it preferable to provide prior period compar￾atives, benchmarking from industries, geographies, and so forth to 
help give context and perspective. Where relevant, it is essential to 
state assurance specific to policy, regulation, and law. Problems tend 
to arise in determining whether you can reach a conclusion and pro￾vide reasonable assurance based on the work performed. Where there 
is a challenge in giving an opinion, then there is a tendency to ramble 
on in one’s narrative, unfortunately not addressing what boards want 
and need.
This may seem like a lot of information, but with careful planning 
(Chapter 5) and plain language (Chapter 4), you can include it without 
losing the reader.
The second point that must be in an executive summary is how you left 
matters with the client, business area, or senior management. Often I phrase 
this as “next steps” when I discuss executive summaries during training, but 
I recognize this can lead people to think of recommendations or action 
plans.
What I mean is something much simpler. Has the client, business area, or 
senior management:188 Radical Reporting
• agreed with your findings?
• agreed with them and – even better – already started addressing them?
• or, most important, refused to accept your findings but provided no 
evidence or reason why?
This last situation is one of the hardest for anyone in an assurance function 
to manage. By the time this happens, disagreements have probably erupted 
during fieldwork, and much more senior people than usual have started 
attending meetings. The atmosphere is already one of conflict, not cooper￾ation. However, if this happens, it must appear in the executive summary.
Most teams will say that unless there is an explicit statement to the con￾trary, readers can assume cooperation and agreement from clients or 
business areas. This means, though, that on the rare and difficult occa￾sions when they don’t agree – and refuse to provide any evidence or 
rationale – the report must say so. Strangely, though, I’ve read perhaps 
half a dozen reports where the executive summary gave no indication of 
discord. Only when reading management’s response to each detailed find￾ing have I realized that not one has been accepted. In this case, the execu￾tive summary can feature a line or two saying, “Unfortunately, we were 
not able to agree our findings with X. We are of course always ready to 
receive any new evidence, and to discuss matters further.” This makes it 
clear that there was a disagreement. The reference to “new evidence” 
should also make clear that those disputing the finding or findings did not 
provide a credible reason.
Oleksander Tytkovskyi of the Ukrainian Defense Ministry is extremely 
precise in what he includes in his reports. He emphasizes the need to comply 
with domestic professional standards and the code of ethics, maintain con￾fidentiality of data, and prevent conflicts of interest. He includes in this list 
“the need to urgently inform management about obstruction or interfer￾ence” in his team’s work. When there is conflict, we must report it in order 
to resolve it – and hiding it in findings is not reporting it. “Never bury the 
bad news,” says Mark Carawan. “Bad news must be within the first few 
lines of the first paragraph.”
Burying bad news is common to most writers. After all, who wants to be 
associated with negative terms such as “weakness,” “non-compliance,” or 
even “failure”? The risks of doing so, however, mean that organizations can￾not address problems. Worse, burying bad news can allow criminal activity 
such as fraud to continue, making the report-writer an accomplice. Consider 
the example in Chapter 1, where a risk team had more than enough evi￾dence, but not enough courage, to say that senior managers were commit￾ting fraud.
Even in less severe situations, hiding bad news is bad news. It speaks to a 
culture where people feel they cannot speak out, or report what they have 
found. Maybe this is the case, as covered at the beginning of this book. 
Maybe it’s perception – many report-writers assume their role is to “toss the Executive summaries 189
rose petals,” praise people, and put a positive spin on the negative. However, 
most senior decision-makers (in organizations with a healthy culture) don’t
want this. They want to know, as quickly and as clearly as possible, how 
things are. The news may be good, bad, or a combination of the two, but the 
writer’s task is to convey this as effectively as possible. Komitas Stepanyan 
of the Central Bank of Armenia says,
I think CEOs, boards, and audit or risk committees want is to get a real 
picture of the institution. Depending on what kind of person the report￾writer is – risk-averse or risk-addicted – he or she may portray the same 
issue in a different light, which is real pity. Reports need to be balanced 
and unbiased, free of the subjective judgment of the report-writer.
We all use our judgment at work, but when judgment is clouded by fear, it 
fails. “Balanced and unbiased” means stating exactly how things are, with￾out fear or favor. Part of achieving this is being strict not only about what 
you include in executive summaries, but also about what you exclude.
MEETING YOUR AUDIENCE’S NEEDS: WHAT TO 
EXCLUDE FROM AN EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The two questions mentioned above – “What is the single most important 
message?” and “How have you left matters with the client, business area, 
or senior management?” – are non-negotiable. As with findings, if you can’t 
answer those questions, you don’t have a report.
Clearly, few teams will produce two-sentence executive summaries and 
leave it at that. However, how far can you go in adding material to the 
executive summary before you dilute your message and confuse or annoy 
readers? The conclusion I’ve come to, after reading thousands of reports, is: 
not very far. This is because once you start adding material, it’s hard to stop. 
If you can justify including a paragraph about objectives and scope, you will 
likely be able to justify spending a page on them.
Ninety-nine percent of readers will skip that page.
You may have professional standards and national or local regulations 
that require certain information in the report. As we saw in Chapter 6, that 
doesn’t necessarily mean it needs to appear in the executive summary – you 
may be able to include it in an appendix. Where you must include such infor￾mation in the executive summary, challenge yourself to make it as concise as 
possible. So, for example, rather than copying and pasting entire paragraphs 
from your terms of reference, create a simple but meaningful sentence. This 
doesn’t mean a vague, boilerplate sentence that is the same from report to 
report – again, readers will quickly learn to skip it. “The review’s objective 
was to assess controls in [area] to ensure they were both adequate and effec￾tive” is generic. “This review examined whether procurement policies, 190 Radical Reporting
processes, and systems in [area] comply with both the law and group policy” 
is more specific.
Useful advice comes from Philipp Kratzer, speaking of his time as 
Director of Galileo PRS Authority at the Austrian Federal Chancellery’s 
Office for Information Security. His role overlapped central government, 
information security, and the European space program – all high-risk 
areas. His reports had to comply with numerous international and national 
standards and laws, as well as with his ministry’s orders. However, 
Philipp’s focus was always on the readers, who don’t appreciate wading 
through references and acronyms: “Security is only as good as its weakest 
part. Security reports have to bear in mind that not everyone is a security 
expert, but they often use wording and abbreviations of specialized cyber/
COMSEC/crypto/information security experts.” Avoiding this pitfall is 
necessary to engaging non-specialist readers in the crucial task of improv￾ing IT security throughout an organization.
Many audit teams include a standard sentence in their executive summa￾ries about why they performed an audit. Usually, this sentence says some￾thing such as, “We performed this audit because it was included in the 
annual audit plan, agreed by the audit committee.” Or, for external or co￾sourced audit teams, “We performed this audit as agreed in our contract 
with the client.” In other words, “We did this because we planned and agreed 
to do this.”
Such sentences don’t just waste precious space on the page and everyone’s 
time and effort – they train readers to skip them. Then, when you audit or 
review something exceptionally, that information will be lost. You may have 
to investigate an area following a scandal or other incident. I’ve certainly 
seen boards and audit committees request ad hoc work in such cases. 
However, if over dozens of reports you’ve trained your readers to skip the 
rationale for the work, don’t be surprised when they do.
Most prefatory material in executive summaries is useless. Not once have 
I read a brief executive summary and wished for more. More often, I find 
myself wading through “executive summaries” whose sub-sections, entitled, 
“introduction,” “background,” and “context,” have little to distinguish 
them, let alone justify their existence. And when there are too many sections 
and sub-sections, most report-writers will protect themselves by repeating 
the information in each. After all, that way, no one can accuse them of leav￾ing information out! But think of your readers. By the time they get to page 
five, they are already bored and irritated, yet none the wiser about the single 
most important message.
One organization came up with a novel – to me, at least – solution: a “syn￾thesis for committees,” something I had never seen in thousands of reports. 
The explanation for this was that the executive summary was too long, so 
they produced a shorter one – a synthesis – for senior decision-makers. This 
overlooks the fact that the executive summary is for senior decision-makers 
– the term itself suggests this. However, the problem was greater than mere Executive summaries 191
repetition of content. First, different people interpreted the readership differ￾ently. Some assumed the “committees” were the board, audit, and risk com￾mittees. Others assumed these were “committees” lower down the 
organizational ladder – operational steering committees, for instance. So, 
with uncertainty about both readers and content, it’s not surprising there 
was duplication and confusion. There were even contradictory messages 
between the executive summary and the “synthesis for committees.”
The longer the executive summary, the greater the contradictions. One 
draft audit report published by a UK local authority in 2009 featured an 
18-paragraph, three-page executive summary.5 Rather than subject you to 
the full document, I’ve summarized the “summary” below, with no attempts 
to clarify what was unclear in the original.
1. Rationale for the audit
2. Background about various committee meetings
3. Information about what various committees discussed during these 
meetings
4. Procedures before and at the time of the audit
5. A government report detailed elements of historic and current service 
to residents
6. More of the same
7. More of the same, with details of some promised fixes
8. A private-sector organization produced a review with proposals for 
future work
9. That same organization produced (another?) review in its research 
(review referred to in 8?)
10. More detail from “the report” (unsure which one)
11. Another meeting
12. Things the private-sector organization had done in the two years 
preceding this audit
13. Three government bodies have shared information
14. Two “main findings and recommendations” [both are recommenda￾tions, and “Who is not doing what?” isn’t clear in either]
15. Assurance and risk ratings
16. Thanks to staff for cooperation
17. Disclaimer of responsibility
18. Glossary and explanation of ratings are in the appendix
This kind of “executive summary” is nothing of the kind. It is, most likely, 
the result of report-writers getting bogged down in detail while trying not 
to upset anyone. While I sympathize with their position – it cannot be easy 
reviewing anything that involves multiple public- and private-sector organ￾izations – the result helps no one. By trying to avoid conflict, such reports 
often only confuse matters.
Komitas Stepanyan is clear about his most senior readers’ needs.192 Radical Reporting
What they don’t want to see – what I think no one wants to see – is 
something that creates confusion or asks “To be or not to be?” CEOs, 
boards, audit and risk committees don’t like when it’s unclear what’s 
expected of them. Sometimes it comes from lots of technical, low-level 
details, an unclear picture, or not enough research and effort into the 
options available.
From almost the other side of the world, John Chesshire echoes Stepanyan’s 
views, if slightly more strongly. “What do senior decision-makers hate?” 
he says. “Lengthy, text-heavy narrative that delivers little insight and that 
focuses on the minutiae rather than the strategic, bigger picture context. 
I think many want solutions, rather than just problems – things that will 
make their lives easier and less painful.” If you think obscuring or dilut￾ing your single most important message makes anyone’s life easier – think 
again. You can help readers find solutions only when you’ve clearly stated 
the problems.
It’s useful at this point to compare executive summaries from two differ￾ent reports and imagine readers’ reactions. Both are from national audit or 
accountability offices, and both are about national defense. The first is from 
the UK and – as with the local government report referred to earlier – fea￾tures a lengthy executive summary. The National Audit Office (NAO)’s 
“Ministry of Defence: The Equipment Plan 2020 to 2030” is 53 pages long, 
with ten pages devoted to the executive summary.6 The summary features 
sub-headings such as “Key findings” and “The Department’s approach to 
producing the Plan.” Yet the website page devoted to this report (and from 
which you can download it) offers a much more concise summary, entitled 
“Report conclusions”.7
For the fourth successive year, the Equipment Plan remains unafforda￾ble. However, the Department has still not established a reliable basis 
to assess the affordability of equipment projects, and its estimate of 
the funding shortfall in the 2020–2030 Plan is likely to understate the 
growing financial pressures that it faces. The Plan does not include the 
full costs of the capabilities that the Department is developing, it con￾tinues to make over-optimistic or inconsistent adjustments to reduce 
cost forecasts and is likely to have underestimated the risks across 
long-term equipment projects. In addition, the Department has not 
resolved weaknesses in its quality assurance of the Plan’s affordability 
assessment. While the Department has made some improvements to its 
approach and the presentation of the Plan over the years, it has not 
fully addressed the inconsistencies which undermine the reliability and 
comparability of its assessment.
The Department faces the fundamental problem that its ambition has 
far exceeded available resources. As a result, its short-term approach to 
financial management has led to increasing cost pressures, which have Executive summaries 193
restricted Top-Level Budgets from developing military capabilities in 
a way that will deliver value for money. The growing financial pres￾sures have also created perverse incentives to include unrealistic sav￾ings, and to not invest in new equipment to address capability risks. 
The recent government announcement of additional defence funding, 
together with the forthcoming Integrated Review, provide opportunities 
for the Department to set out its priorities and develop a more balanced 
investment programme. The Department now needs to break the cycle 
of short-termism that has characterised its management of equipment 
expenditure and apply sound financial management principles to its 
assessment and management of the Equipment Plan.
In comparison, in 2018, the US Government Accountability Office (GAO) 
published a report on Department of Defense financial management.8
Entitled “The Navy Needs to Improve Internal Control over Its Buildings,” 
the report features a “Highlights” page, which functions as the executive 
summary. It features the rationale, the results, and the recommendations 
in three separate boxes. While several of the sentences are very long, and 
the report could have used a bullet-list format for the numbered items, it 
uses graphics to enliven the text and help many readers grasp crucial points 
immediately. The title page alone, however, is a model of clear communica￾tion – would you need to read further to grasp the principal message?
Rachel Browne of Audit Scotland sees senior decision-makers wanting an 
executive summary (or equivalent) with clear recommendations for action 
in the report content and in any covering paper. She notes that Audit 
DOD FINANCIAL 
MANAGEMENT
The Navy Needs to 
Improve Internal 
Control over Its 
Buildings
Accessible Version
Report to Congressional Committees
May 2018
GAO-18-289
United States Government Accountability Office194 Radical Reporting
Scotland calls its executive summaries “Key Messages, which may be state￾ments or judgments (or potentially recommendations).” The NAO report 
uses the term “summary,” while the GAO uses “highlights.” Your team or 
function may use yet another term. What matters is that you articulate 
unambiguously the most important message at the front of the report. Your 
readers can then easily find, read, and respond to it.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARIES AND EMOTIONS
Putting the most important message upfront means, as Mark Carawan 
stated earlier, “Bad news must be within the first few lines of the first par￾agraph.” Unsurprisingly, some people may respond badly to this. Even the 
most senior people have emotions. Astonishment, denial, anger, frustration, 
and defensiveness are all common responses to bad news.
Even if you have been at pains to report factually and carefully, giving 
quantified evidence in context, people may take it personally. After all, as we 
discussed at the beginning of this book, even the driest topic is important to 
people specializing in it. If you report that a team has not delivered a project 
successfully, in spite of spending time and effort on it, that team and its 
managers will be disappointed.
Using the outline technique described in Chapter 5 to structure regular 
discussions should help reduce the number of unpleasant surprises in a 
report. So too will including examples of good practice where you find them. 
However, it is not unusual for readers to focus on the one negative message 
even among a number of positive ones. It’s human nature. Prepare for likely 
reactions by keeping readers informed throughout your audit, review, or 
investigation. If you discuss problems as they arise, you will build trust, 
which will also help readers approach the report more openly. “No sur￾prises” should be the expectation by this point.
Most of you may be thinking of how corporate politics affects how we 
write and read reports. Yet corporate politics is not new; for as long as 
humans have cooperated, there have been factions, alliances, and power 
games in any setting. Keep it in mind, but don’t let it dilute the value of your 
work. Knowing who is interested in your report and for what purpose is 
essential to planning a successful report. Include these people or teams on 
your mind map, so that you can, if necessary, speak to them ahead of 
time,  or seek your own supervisor’s advice about handling delicate 
relationships.
If you often see people “playing politics” with reports, that says some￾thing about your organization’s culture. Are people routinely defensive, or 
keen to blame others? Are people afraid to speak out and therefore resist 
those who do? If the senior managers of the area you’re reviewing behave in 
this way, you should consider addressing that in your work. It may not be 
easy, but it’s certainly necessary.Executive summaries 195
As we said in Chapter 1, auditing corporate culture has been topical and 
indeed fashionable in recent years, with teams looking at this complex sub￾ject in specific functions or departments. However, whether you’re in audit, 
risk, compliance, or IT security, culture is essential to your work. It will 
explain why people do what they do, whether good or bad. Without under￾standing this, you will never be able to give senior decision-makers the 
information they need to improve matters.
One CAE shared with me the wording used in executive summaries to 
introduce the topic of culture and behavior.
During our audit, we observed behavioral aspects which by their 
nature are informal and less tangible. These behavioral aspects may 
be perceived differently by each individual, making them more difficult 
to review and to evaluate. These observations are opinions that can 
help explain why things go wrong; however, they are not subject to 
verification.
Unlike many audit functions, this team did not shy away from this crucial 
factor. The reports state upfront that yes, observations about behavior and 
therefore culture may be subjective – but they’re important. After all, the 
observations can be positive as well as negative.
Balancing the positive and negative in your executive summary has two 
results. First, doing it proportionately means your message accurately 
reflects reality. Don’t “toss the rose petals” or overemphasize the negative – 
either extreme will damage the report’s effectiveness as well as your 
credibility.
Acknowledging what is good is not only the ethical and professional thing 
to do. It also reassures your readers that their successful efforts haven’t been 
in vain. Rinus de Hooge urges report-writers to “report on what is done 
well, as too often reports contain only criticism, and not the positive mes￾sages. Try to step into the shoes of management and think about it how a 
report comes across if you were the recipient.”
This isn’t always easy, especially for those who are used to “reporting by 
exception.” This approach says that if you don’t mention something, your 
readers should assume all is well. The only reason you would mention 
something is if there’s a problem. It’s similar to the approach mentioned 
above, where report-writers expect readers to assume – unless stated other￾wise – that clients, business areas, or senior managers have agreed to the 
findings.
While “reporting by exception” certainly keeps reports shorter and avoids 
ambiguity, it can also alienate readers and raise questions about the thor￾oughness of the report-writer’s work. After all, if the report-writer tested ten 
areas and only one led to findings, where do we find information about the 
nine without findings? If any of them only just passed testing but are likely 196 Radical Reporting
to fail next time, include this. If any of them are models of good practice for 
other parts of the organization, share the news.
Jane Bettany has been using the “appreciative inquiry” model in her work, 
but admits it doesn’t necessarily come easily.9 “I’m always trying to say 
something nice and be positive, which I find frustrating as I want to just say 
it as it is without faffing around.” She also sees a risk in focusing on the posi￾tive, as readers themselves may overlook essential information, the “nega￾tive feedback when you have to improve.”
Fran Meegan, an experienced quality assurance and training manager, 
always tries to be aware of what senior decision-makers may not be aware 
of. This isn’t simply about “translating” technical terminology for non-spe￾cialists. It’s about recognizing that what we assume is clear may not be to 
others. “They like to see things in reports that they have missed or would 
not have found themselves.”
If you are in a similar position, consider the resources that can help you 
communicate complex topics – a common one is cybersecurity – to those 
who must understand them. Examples include the World Economic Forum’s 
Principles for Board Governance of Cyber Risk, for instance, or the 
Conference of State Bank Supervisors’ Cybersecurity 101: A Resource Guide 
for Bank Executives.
10
Whatever your organization or function, certain principles will help your 
report reach its readers. Steven Sanders, Group Chief Internal Auditor at the 
Bank of Ireland, is adamant on the basics:
Brevity, clarity, and precision! Any report content must be worthy 
of being read by a senior executive or board member. It’s so impor￾tant teams ask themselves the question, “Why would the board care 
about this?” If they can’t answer that, then it shouldn’t be in a report. 
No generic statements allowed! What exactly is the matter and what 
exactly is the impact? Don’t be trying to talk to a senior executive or 
board member about general “risk of regulatory censure.” Be specific. 
Be data-led. And be super tight on exactly what the problem is and 
what the first-order direct consequence is.
In one quote, we see the importance of knowing exactly what you have to 
communicate, to whom, and why. Without those elements, you have noth￾ing to report. With them, you do – and must articulate them with “brevity, 
clarity, and precision.” In other words, using plain language.
Whichever tools and techniques you use, plain language must be part 
of you and your everyday workings, mental, verbal, and written. As Alee 
Marschke says, 
We still have paper and pencil in addition to laptops. We still employ 
bank tellers despite the creation of the ATM. Our society may introduce Executive summaries 197
new tools and technologies, but we will not lose the old-fashioned trusted 
ways of doing things. AI tools will likely follow this same trajectory.11
Whether you draft by hand, direct onto a PC or laptop, or come to rely 
on LLMs for certain tasks, your writing is your product and your responsi￾bility. Take pride in the thinking, the articulation, and the wording that con￾vey your message.
And once you have done that, you are ready for the final – but often most 
complex – stage in report-writing: the review.
ACTIVITY
Use this outline to draft your next report. Try doing it by hand, and answer each 
question. Remember – if you cannot answer a question using plain language 
(active, brief, concrete), you should revisit your research or fieldwork.
REPORT OUTLINE
I. Executive summary
A. What is the key message?
B. What is happening as a result of this report? (How has the client or 
senior management responded?)
II. First finding
A. Who is not doing what?
B. What is the risk?
C. What is the root cause? And your recommendation?
III. Second finding
A. Who is not doing what?
B. What is the risk?
C. What is the root cause? And your recommendation?
IV. Third finding
A. Who is not doing what?
B. What is the risk?
C. What is the root cause? And your recommendation?
V. Fourth, fifth, sixth, and so on…
VI. Appendix (Think of this as the attic of your report. Some readers may 
want detailed information about processes, regulatory guidelines, test 
results, etc. Put it here, rather than cluttering up the body of the report.)198 Radical Reporting
SUMMARY
• The executive summary is the “headline” of the report. Whatever you 
call it – executive summary, summary, conclusions, key findings – your 
readers will look to it first. Therefore, the most important information – 
not details, but overarching messages – must feature.
• Knowing your audience and its purpose in reading the report will help you 
understand what to include. However, two non-negotiable questions are:
• What is the single most important message?
• How have you left matters with the client, business area, or senior 
management?
(This is not about recommendations or action plans, but about whether 
the area reviewed has accepted your findings and, if applicable, ratings or 
gradings.)
• It is even more important to be clear about what to exclude. Lengthy 
prefatory or background material, detailed test results, and attempts to 
soften bad news with vague compliments risk confusing your message 
and distracting or annoying readers.
• Executive summaries, done well, may elicit strong responses. Managing 
relationships throughout your audit, review, or investigation reduces the 
chance of surprises and resulting conflicts.
NOTES
1 751.
2 For more information, see Sara I. James, “Effective communications - the report and 
the reporting process” (third in a series of articles communicating effectively with 
non-executive directors), ACCA Internal Audit eBulletin, November, 2020, http://
accaiabulletin.newsweaver.co.uk/accaiabulletin/1kfnflyqumr1g00djcpp5f?email
=true&lang=en&a=1&p=58293902&t=28194286
3 See also Ian Cooke, “Your Audit Reports Have Consequences,” ISACA 
Now Blog, February 12, 2020, www.isaca.org/resources/news-and-trends/
isaca-now-blog/2020/your-audit-reports-have-consequences
4 A UK tabloid and one of the most easily digested daily newspapers.
5 “Major Incident – Flooding. Final Audit Report,” February, 2009, www.rbkc.
gov.uk/pdf/flooding_auditreport09.pdf
6 January 12, 2021, 5–14, The Equipment Plan 2020–2030 (nao.org.uk).
7 www.nao.org.uk/report/equipment-plan-2020-2030/ “Report conclusions” 
(277 words) follows “Background to the report” (237 words) and “Scope of 
the report” (84). This is typical of many reports, where the prefatory mate￾rial – all the parts that readers skip, in Elmore Leonard’s words – adds up to 
more than the substantive message. “Elmore Leonard’s rules for writers,” The 
Guardian, February 24, 2010, www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/24/
elmore-leonard-rules-for-writersExecutive summaries 199
8 May 2018 www.gao.gov/products/gao-18-289.
9 Champlain University, “5-D Cycle of Appreciate Inquiry,” https://apprecia￾tiveinquiry.champlain.edu/learn/appreciative-inquiry-introduction/5-d-cycle￾appreciative-inquiry/
10 In collaboration with PwC, March 23, 2021, www.weforum.org/reports/
principles-for-board-governance-of-cyber-risk; 2020 www.csbs.org/sites/default/
files/2017-11/CSBS%20Cybersecurity%20101%20Resource%20Guide%20
FINAL.pdf
11 Marschke, 12.200 DOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-12
Chapter 9
Reviewing
Making the gain outweigh the pain
Most teams I have worked with over the past 15 years respond similarly 
when I mention report-reviewing. Sighs, frowns, rolled eyes, pointed glances 
toward certain colleagues – everything indicates that for most people, 
reviewing is the thief of all joy. But what do we mean by the term, and why 
do we put ourselves through the pain of the activity?
In theory, each review should have a specific purpose or focus, with the 
reviewer selected for his or her expertise in the relevant area. In practice, 
most people interpret review as anything from “mark up every single typo 
as well as questioning content and structure” to “completely rewrite the 
draft in my own style.” It’s no surprise then that people respond so nega￾tively to the mere mention of reviewing. Yet it’s necessary to produce some￾thing readable, credible, and therefore useful to the organization.
Often the review process takes far too long and improves little. Louise 
McKay of Royal London Group knows the stress it causes all too well.
We all know colleagues who have been handed a vital report that’s 
straying dangerously close to a deadline. This leaves them little time 
to review, never mind provide feedback that can be addressed before 
submitting the report. A clear structure and process, including rigid 
timelines, is essential.
When writers or reviewers are under pressure, they are likelier to make mis￾takes. Mistakes in a final report make it less comprehensible and credible.
But excessive delays, ostensibly to avoid mistakes, can leave people won￾dering if the report is even necessary. Richard Chambers, former President 
of the Global Institute of Internal Auditors, writes that he “once saw a 
report still being batted back and forth after a year.”1 I too have seen this 
happen, which leaves me wondering if there’s any point in issuing the report. 
After all, if it contained important information, the time to act on it has long 
since passed. If it didn’t, why report at all? Chambers is right – for some 
reports, it’s better never than late.
Given how review can delay reports, this chapter will offer practical 
advice on how to review your own and others’ work more efficiently and Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 201
effectively. It will define reviewing (as well as publishing terms for different 
types of reviewing) and suggest how to do so within teams. There is advice 
for writers and reviewers, as well as checklists for both.
REVIEWING, EDITING, AND PROOFREADING
We must define our terms at the outset. The best way to do so is by referring 
to how the publishing process works. If we consider standard usage and 
practice in publishing houses – whether trade, academic, reference, or any 
other genre – several useful distinctions emerge. (I’m excluding from this 
discussion The New Yorker magazine, which has a unique, multilayered, 
extremely rigorous editorial process,2 and newspaper publishing.)
Good practice is to separate the editorial function from production. 
Editorial covers everything from accepting a manuscript to working on it 
for months, possibly years, until both author and editor agree it is ready to 
publish. The editor at this stage may be called a development editor, as he or 
she is responsible for helping the author develop the book’s content. 
Structure, logic, tone – everything substantive is within the development edi￾tor’s remit.
Once the author and the (development) editor agree that the manuscript 
is ready, it goes to the copyeditor. The Chicago Manual of Style splits copy￾editing into three sub-sections. The first, mechanical editing includes gram￾mar, spelling, punctuation, and usage. This is what most people without 
publishing experience may call proofreading. The second, style, means 
adhering to a particular house or press style. That style guide will dictate 
everything from preferred spellings to bibliographical referencing. The third 
is substantive editing, which may include suggesting different ways to pres￾ent the material.3 This is not about duplicating the development editor’s 
work, but about bringing a fresh perspective to the manuscript. A competent 
copyeditor should point out unnecessary repetition, clumsy or confusing 
wording, or illogical sequences, and can correct obvious mistakes.
However, the copyeditor must not rewrite the manuscript – if this is nec￾essary, it is the author’s job. One copyediting job I did several years ago 
specified in the contract that, in addition to putting the text into house style, 
my responsibility was “to ensure that the text is easy to read, grammatically 
correct, uses plain English where possible, and that the text isn’t wordy with 
endless waffle.” (And yes, I did suggest they remove the unnecessary phrase 
“with endless waffle”!)
Finally, proofreading is – in the publishing world – a different task from 
what most people imagine. My clients regularly talk about “wordsmithing” 
(always to accuse a reviewer of changing text to suit his or her own style) 
and “proofreading” (hunting typos and punctuation errors). True proof￾reading comes at the stage when a book is typeset – when it looks the way 
it will when printed. Benjamin Dreyer explains it as “a basic and mechanical 202 Radical Reporting
process.” His 30-year career in publishing started as a proofreader, and his 
“first jobs were simply to ensure that everything on the copyedited manu￾script pages (you kept that stack to your left) had made its way properly 
onto the accompanying typeset pages (you kept that stack on the right).”4
My own experience of proofreading came in my early 20s, when I worked 
in a French government research institute. Long afternoons passed with 
indeed one stack on the left and one on the right. As I followed the text line 
by line on each page, side by side, I moved a ruler down each page so as not 
to miss anything. Proofreading – true proofreading – is, as Dreyer says, basic 
and mechanical, and also exhausting.
Proofreading requires a good deal of attention and concentration, but 
it’s all very binary, very yes/no: Something is right, or something is 
wrong, and if it’s wrong you’re expected to notice it and, by way of 
yet more scrawling, repair it. It’s like working endlessly on one of those 
spot-the-difference picture puzzles in an especially satanic children’s 
magazine.5
A crucial point is that these are not only different tasks but different depart￾ments. Editorial and production departments are separate for a reason – you 
need fresh sets of eyes at each stage. Even in a small publishing house, where 
staff may be experienced in different tasks, it would be risky for a develop￾ment editor to also copyedit or proofread the same manuscript he or she 
has edited. You will all recognize how hard it is to check your own work 
for mistakes once you have read it multiple times. The same is true for those 
who edit and produce books. Word-blindness affects us all.
REVIEWING IN THE WORKPLACE
For those who write and review reports, I suggest not using terms such as 
“editing” and “proofreading.” Instead, we should focus on reviewing sub￾stance and reviewing mechanics. Reviewing substance means exactly that 
– focusing exclusively on the message, and how the structure, logic, and 
tone convey it.
Reviewing mechanics is a completely different task: it’s looking not at the 
substance, but the form. This includes spelling, grammar, punctuation, and 
usage, as well as house style and document layout. If your organization has 
a style guide setting out language preferences, how to write numerals and 
dates, capitalization conventions, and so on, you should follow it. Reviewing 
mechanics also includes checking page numbers, and whether running head￾ers (the report title, for instance) are accurate and consistent.
It is entirely possible – although difficult – to review mechanics without 
engaging with the substance. It is essential to split the two tasks, though; 
trying to review both substance and mechanics will leave the reviewer Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 203
feeling exhausted and irritable. What’s more, he or she will have caught few 
substantive or mechanical errors.
These two types of review are different mental exercises, in the same way 
that sprinting and competing in a marathon are different types of running. 
You can’t do both at the same time. What’s more, most people will have a 
natural preference for one or the other. Just as professional sprinters rarely 
compete in marathons, so a reviewer with an eagle eye for mechanical errors 
may find it difficult to focus on substance alone.
I advise most teams to review mechanics only twice. When the writer is 
ready for the first review, he or she should check the draft report as thor￾oughly as possible: check spelling, grammar, and readability, and read the 
report out loud. If the writer has dyslexia, a review buddy can help at this 
stage. Then, after the report has been through however many layers of 
substantive review (I hope not too many!), someone who hasn’t seen the 
report before should run a final mechanical check. Again, check spelling, 
grammar, and readability, and read it out loud. Many people think they 
can skip this second round of checking. However, if reviewers have tracked 
changes, including moving passages around, accepting those changes with￾out checking the result can lead to what I call Frankensentences. You’ve all 
seen them – two sentences bolted together thanks to tracked changes, but 
with a necessary verb or transition accidentally deleted.
Apart from these two reviews for mechanics, the only reviews should be 
substantive. First, assuming the writer has thoroughly checked the draft 
report, there should be few if any mechanical errors to distract the reviewer. 
Second, if a reviewer is meant to look at substance but focuses on looking 
for typos, the report suffers. Not only does it miss out on the substantive 
review that should take place, but repeatedly reading a document looking 
for mechanical errors is a good way to become word-blind and to miss 
them. (There’s also the fact that the reviewer may review a passage for 
mechanics and later decide to delete it altogether – a waste of time.)
REVIEWING YOUR OWN WORK
The first step to reviewing your own work is writing well. And writing well 
depends on everything we have covered previously: understanding yourself 
and your readers; planning; structure; and throughout, using plain language.
The reason should be obvious, yet most of us, bogged down in detail, 
miss it. The shorter and simpler your draft report, the easier it will be for 
anyone – you, your line manager, clients, other colleagues – to read it. As I 
said – obvious, yet easy to overlook. In previous chapters, I likened planning 
and structuring a report to building a house. Well, reviewing is like cleaning 
a house. It’s easier to do if you’ve cleared the surfaces of all clutter. Even the 
novelist Colson Whitehead adopts this analogy: “Revise, revise, revise. I can￾not stress this enough. Revision is when you do what you should have done 204 Radical Reporting
the first time, but didn’t. It’s like washing the dishes two days later instead 
of right after you finish eating.”6
Whether you ask professional writers or experienced corporate reviewers, 
the message is the same. Fran Meegan does what he advises when he says, 
“Keep it simple and succinct.” If you do this, the review will be so much 
easier, not least because there will be less for would-be wordsmiths to seize 
upon. He sees writers creating a burden for themselves and reviewers by 
failing to heed his advice: “To impress reviewers and justify time spent, peo￾ple fill up pages with unnecessary and irrelevant information.” As we have 
seen in previous chapters, unnecessary and irrelevant information rarely 
informs and usually confuses.
Assuming you have followed the advice in the previous chapters, how can 
you help smooth the process? Again, advice from novelists can be surpris￾ingly helpful. Zadie Smith says, “Try to read your own work as a stranger 
would read it, or even better, as an enemy would.”7 Although reviewers and 
other readers aren’t our enemies, the point is valid. What would you notice 
if you were reading the draft with a critical eye? What weaknesses and gaps 
would you look for? Are you as alert to mechanical errors as the most 
pedantic reader?
Once you are certain your draft is the best possible, consider the review￾er’s time and workload. Have you asked him or her to expect your draft? 
Even in teams where a workflow or work management system alerts people 
to tasks, it’s rarely a bad idea to call or email people about an imminent 
draft. Even better, send a meeting invitation to discuss the draft once the 
reviewer has read it. Yes, you may send it, he or she may accept it, and the 
meeting may still be delayed. But the very fact of receiving the invitation will 
have planted a flag in the reviewer’s mind: the draft report is coming on this 
day, and we should discuss it soon after. If the reviewer anticipates lots of 
tasks on a particular day, taking the time to alert him or her helps everyone 
plan their workload.
It’s common sense and courtesy, but, submerged with tasks, we often 
unintentionally forget both. Remember, most people do not enjoy reviewing 
reports. It may be necessary, but it takes time, energy, and patience they 
don’t always have. Steven Pressfield puts it bluntly but usefully when he 
says, “In the real world, no one is waiting to read what you’ve written. Sight 
unseen, they hate what you’ve written. Why? Because they might have to 
actually read it. Nobody wants to read anything.”8
Another courtesy is to focus the reviewer’s attention on particular tasks, 
or aspects of the draft. Most reviewers will not be aware of the difference 
between reviewing for substance and reviewing for mechanics. They will 
think they’re being professional, conscientious, and thorough by trying to 
do both in the same review. Yet if you can persuade the reviewer to focus on 
one or the other, you will get a better result.
Even focusing solely on substance, most reviewers will give everything 
equal attention – until their energy or patience runs out. So specifying which Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 205
sections of the draft would benefit from their insight will help them help 
you. It may be that the reviewer is a technical expert in a particular area; in 
this case, you can ask him or her to check you’ve explained it accurately yet 
simply, for non-experts. Or you could be concerned that your executive 
summary is too detailed, or sets out a conclusion that your findings don’t 
clearly support. These kinds of comments help the reviewer focus on what 
may be a problem, and also set the scene for your discussion.
There should almost always be a discussion. Unless you have produced an 
exceptional draft for exceptional reviewers, who do not interfere unless 
absolutely necessary, there will be comments and changes.
Most people will say that they don’t need a discussion. With most writ￾ing and reviewing done electronically, they rely on reviewers to track 
changes and insert comment boxes. Writers then usually accept most 
changes, except where they disagree. Then we see the dispiriting ping-pong 
of comment boxes in the margins as writer and reviewer argue their respec￾tive points.
Even when working remotely, a real discussion is possible. Whether by 
phone or videoconference, it is a more efficient and effective approach than 
the virtual ping-pong. Most people will say they don’t have time for a half￾hour or even an hour discussing the draft report. Yet they will spend much 
more time than that on the ping-pong, with worse results. First, the back￾and-forth of the draft report with ever-increasing comment boxes takes 
time, too, and usually interrupts other tasks. Given that interruptions take 
several minutes to recover from, that time adds up. Second, “discussing” the 
report electronically removes the human element. If you speak to each other, 
whether by phone or videoconference, you will better grasp each other’s 
views and feelings. This approach usually increases rather than diminishes 
understanding and goodwill. This can only benefit the current report, future 
reports, and the broader relationship.
As mentioned earlier, time – or at least a misconception of how best to 
use time – often gets in the way of effective review. People are trying to 
juggle multiple tasks, one eye on the clock, and often prioritize meeting 
deadlines over delivering quality. However, by thinking differently about 
how we use our time, we can deliver quality on time. It is – as with most 
worthwhile things – not easy, as it requires discipline and the ability to 
step back. If you have already managed to put at least some of the advice 
into this book into practice, though, you will have an advantage. You 
will already have experienced the benefits of forcing yourself to think 
and work differently, and seen how it improves the rigor and quality of 
your writing.
Take the lead in the reviewing process. By setting expectations about tim￾ing, focus, and medium, you can show the reviewer how to achieve more in 
less time. Then, when you in turn review other people’s work, you can share 
with them the benefits of this approach. All you then need to do is discipline 
yourself further when reading the draft report.206 Radical Reporting
REVIEWING ANOTHER’S WORK – AND HAVING 
YOUR OWN WORK REVIEWED
The previous sentence is slightly tongue-in-cheek. Few things are harder 
than reading someone else’s work and resisting the temptation to scribble 
all over it. You may be doing so from the best of intentions, but like an ill￾trained puppy jumping up and putting its muddy paws all over someone, 
you’ll only make a mess.
The preceding section is crucial to good reviewing. If the writer hasn’t 
checked his or her work thoroughly – if you spot mechanical errors that 
spell- and grammar-checkers could have caught – then return the draft to 
the writer. Unless he or she has dyslexia – in which case a review buddy 
should have caught the errors – there’s no excuse.
This immediately brings us back to the cry of, “But I don’t have time! I 
need to review it now!” If you don’t have time to do as I’ve just suggested, 
then three things will happen. First, you’ll waste your own time on mechani￾cal errors. Any substantive problems – the very things you should be looking 
for – will go unchecked. Second, you’ll be doing the writer’s work for him or 
her. Lazy colleagues love this, and will continue to rely on you to do what 
they should have done. Others, though, will never realize where they need to 
improve. Third, by reviewing quickly and badly now, you’re guaranteeing 
that this inefficient and ineffective process continues, resulting in flawed 
reports.
Take that step back. What would happen if you returned the draft to the 
writer and negotiated a slightly later deadline for the report? The writer 
would realize where he or she has to improve, and would take responsibility 
for this and future reports. You, as a reviewer, would then receive a cleaner 
draft, which you can review substantively. The report recipients would 
receive a better-quality report – not just this time, but in the future.
When people say they don’t have time to use this approach, they’re saying 
quality doesn’t matter. They’re forgetting the purpose of reports and the 
readers’ needs. Remember – no senior decision-maker ever said, “Ah, they’ve 
sent me the report by noon. It’s completely unreadable, but at least they met 
the deadline.”
If both writer and reviewer approach the process with common sense and 
courtesy, setting aside time to discuss their thoughts, the report will benefit. 
This requires both parties to change working habits, acquired over decades 
in some cases. It will probably also require the reviewer to abandon all 
assumptions about what reviewing is. It isn’t, as we’ve seen, reading the 
draft report and trying to spot both substantive and mechanical problems at 
the same time.
Nor is it “wordsmithing,” in the sense many people use the term. As stated 
in Chapter 4, “wordsmithing,” which should be a fine and noble activity, is 
often used to mean endlessly carping and caviling over wording to no good 
end. You’ll have met “wordsmiths” in the office; they’re rarely fine crafters Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 207
of elegant phrasing, spun from fine raw materials. As reviewers, they’re the 
people who overlook major flaws in content to focus on mechanics. If the 
writing is wordy, passive, and convoluted, I sympathize. Faced with tens of 
pages of verbiage and a deadline, it’s easier to focus on the superficial: typos 
(which the writer should have spotted), formatting, and imagined crimes 
against grammar.
Let’s be clear – we’re not talking about reviewers who spot mechanical 
errors and hand the draft back to the writer to resubmit a clean version. 
That’s a good decision, and one that will improve the writer’s skills and the 
team’s efficiency. Nor are we talking about reviewers who are reviewing for 
mechanics: typos, formatting, and true grammatical errors are exactly what 
they should look for.
The “wordsmiths” are those who replace “however” with “nevertheless” – 
not for elegant variation, but throughout the document. They’re the ones 
who rewrite in the passive, “because it sounds more professional.” They 
leap on split infinitives and sentences ending with prepositions, circle 
them in red, and never realize that these “rules” are as contrived as they 
are unhelpful. (See Martin Cutts’ chapter on grammar myths in The 
Oxford Guide to Plain English – it’s an excellent defense against the 
“wordsmiths.”)
Most damagingly, they’re the ones who rewrite reports in their own style, 
following their own (mis)understanding of the topic. Without discussing the 
draft with the writer, errors can abound. After all, if a reviewer finds a pas￾sage unclear, by definition he or she is poorly equipped to rewrite it. It’s all 
too likely the result will change the intended meaning.
A longer-term problem can arise from chronic rewriting. Years ago, a 
junior internal auditor in the bank where I worked told me that she’d 
received an email from her team leader. He told her that the first report 
she’d ever drafted had gone out in the final version. She looked it up and 
saw that – after five layers of review – she didn’t recognize a word of her 
original draft in the final report. The content and style had both disap￾peared, replaced by five different reviewers’ ideas of what she was trying to 
convey and how she should convey it.
Obviously, there is the risk mentioned earlier – that the message changes, 
and the report fails to communicate what it should. In this case, however, 
the review process had a further effect in completely demoralizing this 
young team member. No one had intended this to happen, but in the rush to 
meet the deadline, each reviewer had said, “Ah, I’ll just change this to get it 
out, and discuss it with the team later.” None of them did. Unsurprisingly, 
the junior auditor who’d drafted the report eventually left the function.
Many reviewers reading this will recognize the link between discussing 
reports with those who draft them and professional development. But again, 
time and habit get in the way. Rachel Browne of Audit Scotland describes 
perfectly the tension between what people know they should do, and what 
often happens under pressure.208 Radical Reporting
It’s seen as demotivating to rewrite people’s draft reports – we try to 
balance getting the wording the way the reviewer wants it vs. using 
people’s work as much as we can. We have high hopes for using active 
voice, plain language, etc., but local reports get written in a hurry, and 
the individual manager or engagement lead gets the final say on how 
we report.
Depending on the office politics, an influential but counterproductive senior 
reviewer can do lots of damage. However, most mean well and don’t realize 
when they’re not helping. There’s also an element of passing on review￾ing practices, even while recognizing their flaws: “My first-ever manager 
crushed my spirit when reviewing my work, so I’m doing it to you.” Finally, 
there’s the eternal existence of ego – most people instinctively impose their 
own style on others. Maybe they genuinely think it’s better; maybe it is. But 
it won’t help the writer improve.
Reviewers must take that step back – from the document and from 
their personal preferences. It’s difficult because it involves emotions on 
both sides, and therefore requires not only common sense and courtesy, 
but also compassion. We rarely talk about compassion in reporting, yet 
it’s essential. As much as we may hate reviewing, we have to assume that 
most writers do their best and submit their drafts in good faith. If we 
find errors, it’s rarely because the writers have been lazy, sloppy, or 
unprofessional (although some may be). Most people simply need the 
objective – and compassionate – help of a reviewer to help them see what 
they no longer can. Benjamin Dreyer says of editors, “You’re attempting 
to burrow into the brains of your writers and do for, to, and with their 
prose what they themselves might have done for, to, and with it had they 
not already looked at each damn sentence 657 times.”9 As reviewers, you 
too are there to help the writer overcome word-blindness and produce 
the best version of what he or she has to say – not what you wish to 
impose.
Early in this book, we discussed the importance of understanding our 
colleagues and readers – their assumptions, values, and yes, emotions. Not 
acknowledging how people feel about their writing – whether as writer or 
reviewer – leads to a vicious cycle. When reviewers rewrite, writers feel 
defensive, oppressed, or insulted. They then see no reason to try their best, 
as whatever they write will be rewritten. So then, they produce poor-qual￾ity work, which leads reviewers to claim they were right all along to 
rewrite. And the cycle – ineffective, inefficient, demoralizing – continues, 
producing reports that are so much less readable than they could have 
been.
Endre Bihari has a useful checklist of advice for reviewers. (You’ll find 
another checklist, and a suggested reviewing process, at the end of this 
chapter.)Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 209
• “Casual skimming and superficial commenting does violence to the 
review process.
• “There is a difference between criticizing and critiquing. Make sure 
you do only the second one.
• “Do not take yourself overly seriously – it is not your writing.
• “Do not jump to conclusions. Work your way through to the overall 
end.
• “Keep examining your own biases as you read.”10
This should make sense to everyone, although it can be difficult to force 
yourself to do it. One tip when reviewing substance is to not have a pen. 
If you are reviewing on-screen, cover the keyboard. The effect here is to 
deprive the reviewer of the chance to amend or make notes to the draft. 
If you’re reviewing for substance, you should read the whole document 
through to the end, as Bihari says. Having a pen or keyboard to hand 
means you are almost guaranteed to use it – to make notes, to start sug￾gesting changes, or to correct typos. All of these may be useful, but not at 
this stage.
If your first instinct when reviewing substance is to pick up a pen or poise 
your fingers over the keyboard, you will not only review badly. You will also 
demoralize the writer if you are visible. Put yourself in the writer’s shoes. 
Imagine you’re in the corporate panopticon of an open-plan office and have 
just handed your draft report to the reviewer. Now imagine the first thing 
you see the reviewer do is pick up a pen. You will probably interpret that 
gesture as proving that the reviewer intends to change your report whether 
it needs it or not, which is discouraging.
When working remotely, we often send our comments not by pen on 
paper, but by tracked changes and comment boxes. Think of the last time 
you opened a reviewed document. If it was covered in tracked changes, your 
heart probably sank. I understand – it’s a depressing sight, and one that 
often puts the writer immediately on the defensive.
This brings us back to compassion. The point isn’t to excuse or allow 
mistakes in draft reports, but to see and discuss them in a way that encour￾ages the writer and makes him or her want to improve. We can only do this 
as reviewers by showing compassion for writers, and by reining in our urge 
to impose ourselves on their work. “Criticizing someone’s writing can be 
unnerving for them,” says Martin Cutts. “So, before you intervene, always 
consider how you yourself would feel about it. Remember also that editing 
is far easier than creating the first draft, so always give due praise.”11
Cutts also usefully distinguishes between high quality and uniformity 
(often referred to as “consistency,” by writers and reviewers who simply 
want to know whose style to imitate unthinkingly, in the vain hope that it 
will reduce the number of corrections). Give up, advises Cutts: “It’s fair for 
you to want a high standard of clarity and grammar. But no two writers will 210 Radical Reporting
ever use exactly the same words or tone of voice, so trying to impose unifor￾mity will be both demoralizing and futile.”12
Managers who understand the importance of reviewing well create pro￾cesses to encourage both writers and reviewers to work constructively 
together. This could mean addressing directly the principles of communica￾tion, as Paul Breach does.
In my former role as Head of Professional Practices, NatWest Group, 
I added a distinct chapter to our methodology focused on communica￾tion. I did so as I felt that it was necessary to bring together key expec￾tations and standards in a single place. Also, by giving it a standalone 
chapter in a principles- and standards-led methodology manual, I felt 
it made a point in itself that this was an important topic which merited 
its own principles and standards. Quality assurance reviews, hot and 
cold, included particular focus on the quality of written communica￾tion. In addition, we quality-controlled a sample of audit reports before 
the reports were released.
Checking the report quality is essential in any department, and the results 
may influence staff members’ annual appraisals. However, this should always 
be balanced, so that both writers and reviewers are held equally responsible. 
It’s not fair to tell people that writing a clear draft report is a crucial part 
of their job, while not holding reviewers to account. Reviewers too should 
have to prove they have contributed substantively and constructively to the 
process – not simply rewritten other people’s work. Both parties should also 
be able to demonstrate their willingness to have constructive discussions, by 
phone or videoconference, about draft reports. Sending multiple versions 
with tracked changes back and forth isn’t as effective – it’s a series of alter￾nating monologues, rather than a two-way conversation.
Staff members will need different levels of support and comment about 
their drafts – good managers understand this. Jane Bettany of Frontline 
AIDS says of giving feedback,
 I used to be much better at this, but in my current role I have less time 
for it. I will often be sent a report to review and add comments with 
tracked changes, then send it back. With a team I trust, that will suffice; 
I will trust them to make the changes as they see fit and then send it out. 
With other staff members, who need a bit more development, I would 
ask them to send it back to me for review. I may go over it with them on 
a call in a bit more detail so they fully understand. The report may go 
back and forth a few times. I try to plan and set a deadline for the report 
to be sent to me well in advance of when it is due to allow time for this.
Not everyone is as sensitive to team members’ skills, confidence levels, and 
needs, of course, and Rinus de Hooge thinks people in the corporate world Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 211
could better manage their and others’ emotions. “In most companies,” he 
tells me,
empathy is a word that is not on the radar screen of most managers. 
Neither is the word kindness. It is not expensive to be kind to people 
and still be a profitable and effective company. In an environment where 
people can be genuinely themselves, feel at home, feel safe, production 
is higher, cohesion is better and people stay longer with the company.
So how can you produce better reports with less effort at the review stage? 
Focusing on the difference between reviewing for substance and for mechan￾ics is essential, as is talking to your colleagues. Don’t outsource the process 
to a document with tracked changes and expect anything other than brief, 
factual responses. For the important substantive points – for example, why 
does the tone change halfway through? I thought the executive summary 
sounded positive, but the findings scared me! How can we articulate the 
risk better, so the readers understand why they need to act? – you need 
conversation.
Below is a suggested flowchart for the review process. You can adapt it to 
your organization, function, or team, as you see fit. Sawyer’s Internal 
Auditing also has a good checklist for reviewing reports, including review￾ing mechanics (“proofreading” in the text).13
For reviewing reports with clients or senior managers whose area you 
have reviewed, investigated, or audited, Sawyer features an entire chapter 
devoted to the topic. However, consider my suggestions from Chapter 5 – 
using an outline as aide-mémoire throughout your fieldwork can promote 
open, useful discussions with these people. As always, preparation can save 
everyone involved in the report process time, energy, and negative emotion. 
And the result will benefit the whole organization.14212 Radical Reporting
PROPOSED SUBMISSION AND REVIEW PROCESS 
FOR REPORTS
Writer:
• Manage the process of drafting, writing, and reviewing own work, 
using 50/20/30 (50% of time spent on planning report, 20% on 
writing, and 30% on the review stage).
• Set expectations with peer or line manager reviewers about times￾cales and what you want from the review (technical expert’s view? 
sense-check on risk ratings? review of mechanics?).
• Ensure your draft is as clean as possible – no typos or formatting 
errors.
Team (peer review):
• Review each other’s work promptly and constructively.
• If the writer asks for a review of substance, do not check mechan￾ics; if the writer needs help checking mechanics, do not meddle with 
substance.
• No wordsmithing – your individual styles are your own. If a piece of 
writing is clear, leave it alone.
Manager:
• Enforce deadlines and quality standards. If you see mistakes that 
could and should have been picked up at an earlier stage, return the 
draft to the writer.
• Check for substance – is it absolutely clear what the problem is, 
why it matters, and what the business needs to do about it? Is the 
substance relevant as well as true? Does it pass the “So what?” test?
• Are there any recent factors (current events, internal politics) that 
need to be taken into account?
Head of department:
• Support managers in setting and reinforcing standards.
• Review reports at a high operational or strategic level (no 
proofreading!).
• Contact managers immediately to clarify any points or flag any 
problems.Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 213
WRITING CHECKLIST
For any piece of writing, ask yourself:
• Do I know who the audience is?
• Have I made it clear what the issues are and why anyone cares?
• What is the order of events that will be clearest to the reader?
• Have I purged the draft of unnecessary words? Have I tried to keep 
sentences to 20 words or fewer?
• Have I avoided passive voice and zombie nouns?
• Have I used the most specific word possible in each instance? Have I 
used the correct word (there/their/they’re, infer/imply, etc.)? Have I 
made up words?
• Have I checked spelling, grammar, and punctuation?
• Is the formatting correct?
• Have I read it aloud to spot any run-on sentences, clumsy phrases, or 
cut-and-paste casualties?
• Is this the best possible account I can give of my team’s work and opinion?
• Could I send this to the executive now? In fact, if my manager weren’t 
here to check this, could I send it straight out?
REVIEWING CHECKLIST
Before starting to review someone else’s work (for substance, not mechan￾ical errors):
• Put your pen or pencil away, or cover your keyboard so you cannot 
use the keys.
• Make sure you know who the audience is, at what stage the draft is, 
and whether you’re reviewing for substance or mechanics.
While reviewing someone else’s work:
• If you spot a mistake that a spelling- or grammar-checking tool could 
have picked up, consider returning the draft to the writer and asking 
for a clean copy.
• Read through the entire draft to form an opinion of the overall mes￾sage and tone. Once you have done this, it’s safe to use a pen or pencil!
• If something is unclear, make notes in the margins for discussion, 
rather than trying to rewrite.
After reviewing someone else’s work:
• If it’s not possible to discuss face to face, try to do so by phone. If you 
must comment electronically, use comments (Review/New Comment) 
rather than tracking changes. (Track changes only for mechanical 
errors.)214 Radical Reporting
ACTIVITY
Below are excerpts from real emails from a banking organization in 2008. 
Various financial services organizations, central banks, and regulators had real￾ized that the London Interbank Overnight Rate (LIBOR) was susceptible to 
manipulation, and therefore fraud. This became a scandal in the sector in 2012, 
leading to criminal charges in some cases.
Read the text below and see if you can review it first for mechanics and then 
for substance. You will find a list of mechanical errors on the next page.
Thank you for taking an interest in these matters and I hope that I have covered 
your concerns in saying that we will now consult both on a second and later Dollar 
LIBOR fix and on the transparency/stigmisation issue. Other clarifications are that 
we are strenghtening the governance immediately, that we have clarified the LIBOR 
definitions and that although we received no new application from any bank for any 
Panel, we will now open discussions with a selection of US and European banks for 
the purposes of seeking additional contributions particularly to the Dollar LIBOR 
panel. All other alterations are a mixture of better grammer, better layout and better 
explanations – the usual drafting points.
As to the prose, some we have used, some are no longer relevant as drafting has 
moved on, and some we will stay with our original phraseology.
Turning to the points of substance, practionners consider it a high risk move to say 
we will consult on the 12month fix. It will therefore be clarified in the text
Your proposal that we reduce what is said in sectiion 13 on governance I am afraid 
is not possible. In fact to get a way forward is going to require a stong governance for 
libor and the pressure is to do more not less.
I am also assuming that central banks will want to be associated with this in some 
form and look forward to the phraseology you want us to use.
The paper is now on its last round. Obviously we are not seeking textural and 
grammatical comments.
Now ask yourself:
• Which type of review came more naturally? Did you catch all the 
mechanical errors, or were you able to ignore them when reviewing for 
substance?
• How can you use this insight to offer reviewing services to colleagues?
• If you found all the mechanical errors, you are probably naturally good at 
this task. Volunteer to review a colleague’s draft report for these – not 
substantive – problems. You may become the team’s expert in this skill.
• Did your eye skip over typos and mispunctuation, while you focused 
on errors of logic or tone? Then your skill is in substantive review. This Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 215
means you can focus on content without being distracted by mechanical 
errors.
• It is good to know which your natural tendency is; mention this to your 
line manager, so that he or she can best use your skills to improve the 
team’s reports.
EXERCISE – MECHANICAL ERRORS MARKED IN 
BOLD, WITH COMMENTARY FROM THE AUTHOR
Thank you for taking an interest in these matters and I hope that I have cov￾ered your concerns in saying that we will now consult both on a second and 
later Dollar LIBOR fix and on the transparency/stigmisation [typo: stig￾matization or stigmatisation] issue. Other clarifications are that we are 
strenghtening [typo: strengthening] the governance immediately, that we 
have clarified the LIBOR definitions and that although we received no new 
application from any bank for any Panel, we will now open discussions with a 
selection of US and European banks for the purposes of seeking additional con￾tributions particularly to the Dollar [should be lower-case] LIBOR panel. 
All other alterations are a mixture of better grammer [typo: grammar], 
better layout and better explanations – the usual drafting points.
As to the prose [odd choice of word – “wording” or “phrasing” 
would be better, as “prose” is more literary], some we have used, some 
are no longer relevant as drafting has moved on, and some we will stay with 
our original phraseology [very odd choice of word – archaic and pre￾tentious; “wording” or “phrasing” instead].
Turning to the points of substance, practionners [typo: practitioners]
consider it a high risk [should be hyphenated: high-risk] move to say we 
will consult on the 12month [should be hyphenated: 12-month] fix. It 
will therefore be clarified in the text
Your proposal that we reduce what is said in sectiion [typo: section] 13 
on governance I am afraid is not possible. In fact to get a way forward is going 
to require a stong [typo: strong] governance for libor [should be capital￾ized, as before] and the pressure is to do more not less.
I am also assuming that central banks will want to be associated with this in 
some form and look forward to the phraseology [see comment above]
you want us to use.
The paper is now on its last round. Obviously we are not seeking textural 
[word choice: should be “textual”] and grammatical comments.216 Radical Reporting
SUMMARY
• Reviewing is often among the most time-consuming and painful parts of 
the reporting process.
• Through understanding different types of review, and how and when to 
use them, writers and reviewers can work together to produce better 
final reports with less pain.
• Reviewing for mechanics should happen twice – at the very beginning 
and very end. It is about spotting typos, grammatical errors, punctuation 
and usage mistakes, and problems with house style or formatting.
• Reviewing for substance is about content – message, logic, and tone.
• Writers should do everything possible to provide reviewers with clear, 
concise, accurate draft reports, free of avoidable errors such as typos.
• Reviewers should focus on one type of review only, and avoid rewriting 
in their own style.
• Common sense, courtesy, compassion, and conversation – all are crucial.
NOTES
1 “For Some Audit Reports: It’s Better Never Than Late,” Richard F. Chambers 
& Associates blog, June 14, 2021, www.richardchambers.com/for-some￾audit-reports-its-better-never-than-late/
2 The writer Mary Norris started her publishing career as “a page OK’er – a posi￾tion that exists only at The New Yorker, where you query-proofread pieces and 
manage them, with the editor, the author, a fact checker, and a second proof￾reader, until they go to press.” Between You & Me: Confessions of a Comma 
Queen (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 2015), 12.
3 The Chicago Manual of Style. 14th ed. (Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press, 1993), 65. See also Arthur Plotnik, The Elements of Editing: A 
Modern Guide for Editors and Journalists (New York: Macmillan, 1982), 
the Chartered Institute of Editing and Proofreading’s “What is copyedit￾ing?,” www.ciep.uk/about/faqs/what-is-copyediting/, and “FAQs: What is the 
Some may say that emails typed in haste are prone to more mis￾takes. While this is true, emails from other sources in the LIBOR 
e-correspondence featured few, if any mistakes. Furthermore, typing 
in haste would not explain the author’s tendency to use overblown – 
and often inaccurate – vocabulary.Reviewing: Making the gain outweigh the pain 217
difference between copyediting and proofreading?,” www.ciep.uk/about/faqs/
what-is-the-difference-between-copyediting-and-proofreading/
4 Dreyer’s English, xxii.
5 xxii. In addition to proofreading and copyediting, I’ve also worked in the edito￾rial department of a global publishing house, and as a production editor for an 
academic press. Looking back, I can see clearly that I was a good proofreader 
and production editor at the time, but did not become a good copyeditor until I 
was in my 40s. Part of this is down to the amount of leeway in each role – almost 
none in proofreading and production editing, but quite a bit in copyediting. With 
little leeway, the junior member of staff must restrain his or her impulses and 
simply follow the black-and-white guidelines. With time, and more manuscripts, 
comes a better sense of what is acceptable and what isn’t. I strongly believe 
that poor copyediting usually comes from inexperienced copyeditors (often used 
because they are cheap). Even with a good style guide, copyeditors with little 
knowledge or experience may see ambiguity or error where there is none, and 
alter what they should leave alone.
6 “Colson Whitehead’s Rules for Writing,” The New York Times, July 29, 2012, 
www.nytimes.com/2012/07/29/books/review/colson-whiteheads-rules-for-writ￾ing.html
7 “Rules for Writers,” The Guardian, February 22, 2010, www.theguardian.com/
books/2010/feb/22/zadie-smith-rules-for-writers
8 Pressfield, Nobody Wants to Read, 4.
9 Dreyer’s English, xxiv.
10 “On Writing and Reviewing…,” EDPACS, 58:4 (2018): 1–28. 4, www.tandfon￾line.com/loi/uedp20
11 Cutts, Oxford Guide, 227.
12 Ibid.
13 787–91.
14 Sawyer’s Internal Auditing, Chapter 14: “Audit Report Reviews and Replies,” 
819–48.218 DOI: 10.1201/9781003422365-13
Conclusion
This book has taken you on a whirlwind tour of the most important aspects 
of report-writing. We began with the role of culture and cultures in com￾munication and with reviewing draft reports. In between, we covered plain 
language and the importance of rigorous planning and structure, as well as 
common components of reports.
This book may be short, but I hope you feel it has been rich in advice and 
insights. Rather than focusing on theory, the point throughout has been to 
help you understand the underlying principles, motives, and habits that pro￾duce most reporting – so that you can do something different. Finally, words 
of encouragement – simply by reading even parts of this book, you have 
shown your commitment to improving your skills. This alone will make you 
a better professional, colleague, and communicator.
The very fact you have read this book, or at least parts of it, demonstrates 
that you know there are better ways to produce better reports. You recog￾nize that “Reports are the auditor’s opportunity to get management’s undi￾vided attention. That is how auditors should regard reporting – as an 
opportunity, not dreary drudgery – a perfect occasion to show management 
how auditors can help.”1 Whether you’re an auditor, risk, compliance, or IT 
professional, reports can and should be exactly this – an opportunity for 
cooperation and improvement.
So what brought you to this book? Maybe you have finally realized that 
your organization’s ways of communicating are ineffective. Maybe you have 
run out of patience with the way your colleagues or team members write 
and review. Or maybe you have decided to improve your own written work, 
reports included. Whatever the cause, you have taken a crucial step in your 
personal and professional development.
David Deegan is Executive Development Director (Special Operations) at 
Cranfield School of Management in the UK. He has worked with countless 
organizations and their staff over decades, building up insight into how and 
why people work the way they do. Using the “burning platform” analogy, he 
points out how difficult it is for people to shift their perceptions and actions.Conclusion 219
Behavioral change does not happen without motivation. Essentially the 
leap into freezing seas from a 30-metre oilrig platform is dangerous and 
life-threatening – there is a possibility you will die. But the alternative is 
to stay on the oilrig, and if you do, your death is guaranteed. Although 
changing behavior is difficult, uncomfortable, and inconvenient, some￾times the impact of not changing is worse.
What are the risks your team or organization faces if it doesn’t change its 
reporting? Often it will be the kind of risks mentioned in Chapter 7: finan￾cial, reputational, and regulatory. If severe enough, the risks could threaten 
the organization’s very existence. However, if you work in the public sector, 
manufacturing, health care, or another field with physical risks, your organ￾ization could indeed face a real burning platform. Consider, after all, the BP 
Deepwater Horizon accident – I referred to the report several times in this 
book.
The point is that changing how we think, communicate, write, and 
review is one of the hardest things to do, wherever you work. It requires 
examining deep and long-held beliefs about ourselves, our place in the 
world, and how we relate to other people. Trying to do so in the face of 
corporatespeak, especially if it is ingrained at all levels, is even harder – all 
the more so as corporatespeak, for all its managerial trappings, is often 
fundamentally illogical.
As Barbara Ehrenreich says,
I expected, as I approached the corporate world, to enter a brisk, log￾ical, nonsense-free zone, almost like the military – or a disciplined, 
up-to-date military anyway – in its focus on concrete results. How else 
would companies survive fierce competition? But what I encountered 
was a culture riven with assumptions unrelated to those that underlie 
the fact- and logic-based worlds of, say, science and journalism – a 
culture addicted to untested habits, paralyzed by conformity, and shot 
through with magical thinking.2
The recent trend for “agile” auditing, loosely based on a method of software 
development popularized in the early 2000s, is an example. When one disci￾pline lifts terms and principles from another discipline without fully under￾standing them, the result can at best be inefficiency. I have asked clients 
across the globe what they feel “agile” brings to their practice. The answers 
are often things they always could and should have done – regular meetings 
with clients and each other, for instance, or writing shorter reports. Often, 
though, they are doing the same things but with different labels, requiring a 
layer of less-than-intuitive vocabulary (“scrum,” “stand up,” “tribe”) that 
people must learn simply to show they are team players. If this book does 
one thing, it should attune you to the language people use and why, so that 
you can decide for yourself what is useful – or merely a passing fad.220 Radical Reporting
This book should do many more things, though. The first chapters focused 
on the importance of culture – individual, regional, national, professional, 
sectoral, and organizational – in communication. Organizations may not be 
people, but they may still have “personalities.” When people talk about 
organizational culture, they talk about shared values and beliefs, but there 
is still room for different assumptions and approaches at both team and 
individual levels. Understanding ourselves and our colleagues and clients is 
essential to any successful communication.
Those to whom we communicate, though, can be outside our organiza￾tions. This broadens further the range of backgrounds, contexts, and objec￾tives we must take into account when writing for a varied audience. If we 
don’t understand our readers, who they are, and what they need, then our 
reports will fail the organization. And, as we saw through several case stud￾ies, the consequences can be severe.
Plain language can reduce the risk of reports failing to communicate well. 
Chapters 3 and 4 covered the theory and the practice of using clear, simple 
words and sentences. However, it requires clear-sightedness and courage to 
do so. Everything from individual ego to collective habit (corporatespeak) 
stands in the way, making writing clearly not only a difficult task but an 
ethical choice.
Writing clearly is as simple as the ABCs: being active, brief, and concrete. 
However, it’s not easy. You need to understand your subject extremely well 
to be able to explain it simply. Favoring the active over the passive voice 
alone will improve any piece of writing. It will make it shorter, clearer, more 
confident, and compelling – all of which appeal to readers.
Before you start writing in wonderfully plain language, though, you must 
check you really do understand your subject and can explain it coherently. 
Planning techniques – mind-mapping and outlines, for example – will show 
you where you have gaps in your knowledge or research. Once you have all 
you need, they will help you organize your information in a coherent man￾ner, including what is most relevant and useful.
The more you plan – sharpening your axe before chopping down a 
tree – the less you need to write. The James Ratio (50% of your report￾writing time on planning, 20% on writing, and 30% on quality checks) 
works for everything from complex emails to exam questions to reports 
and books.
However, if your reader can’t read your report, your efforts will have been 
in vain. Make sure the structure is simple and the layout easy on the eye. 
Everyone benefits from accessible writing, which is now mandated by law in 
many jurisdictions for public documents.
Reports require all the preceding elements to be in place: awareness of 
culture and its role in communication; understanding ourselves and our 
readers, including their purpose in reading reports; plain language, good 
planning, sound structure, and reader-friendly layout. If a single one of these 
is missing, the report risks being ineffective.Conclusion 221
In the chapters on findings and executive summaries, I suggested ques￾tions that you must be able to answer in order to even have something to 
report.
• “Who is not doing what?” (observation)
• “So what?” (risk)
• “How did this happen?” (root cause)
and
• What is the single most important message?
• How have you left matters with the client, business area, or senior 
management?
If you cannot answer these questions clearly and succinctly, you are not 
ready to write. Have you understood risk correctly? Have you analyzed the 
root cause? Have you stepped back to see the overarching theme you must 
communicate? A report that simply lists stuff that happened may be true – 
but it is unlikely to be relevant or useful.
Once you have written your report, reviewing awaits. It can be construc￾tive, productive, and build rather than damage relationships, but only if all 
parties return to the principles in the first two chapters. Understanding the 
people involved and their emotions, and learning how to rein in impulses 
such as rewriting or criticizing for the sake of it, are crucial.
Chapter 7 mentioned the five Cs approach to findings. I’d like to propose 
a different five Cs for reporting, or indeed any communication: culture, clar￾ity, courage, compassion, and conversation. The last two appeared (with 
courtesy and common sense) in Chapter 9, with culture being the focus of 
the first two chapters. Clarity and courage are what we all need to see what 
is in front of us and name it.
Steven Sanders of Bank of Ireland sees only two crucial components of a 
good report: plain language and “guts.” The first, because
as soon as we humans – or auditors who happen to be human – pick up 
a pen, we somehow feel the need to be all officious and florid with our 
language. A career in politics awaits many an auditor with the lack of 
apparent desire to be clear. And that should not be seen as a good thing! 
I often read reports and have to read it again thinking, “What does this 
mean?” And guts because we can be so keen to not upset someone or 
take a clear stance that we sit on the fence. Jump off it and give a view. 
Newsflash – we live in a perpetual world of imperfect data. Have faith 
in your judgment and give a clear view.
Bringing together all the points covered in this book brings us to this place: 
one of plain language and guts. A profoundly human, reflective approach to 222 Radical Reporting
report-writing does not come easily, requiring time, patience, and honesty. 
Understanding culture is a lifetime’s work; seeing clearly means seeing what 
is bad and wrong; courage is prized precisely because it is rare; and compas￾sion and conversation require more effort and discipline than most of us are 
used to. Yet without talking and listening to each other, we will never write 
anything worth reading.
NOTES
1 Sawyer’s Internal Auditing, 729.
2 Bait and Switch, 226.4223
Resources
According to Stephen King (yes, that Stephen King), “If you don’t have time 
to read, you don’t have the time (or the tools) to write. Simple as that.”1
So if you want to write better, you must read more. I usually advise people 
to read as widely as possible, in any genre – except business and manage￾ment books. (This book is an exception, of course.) The reason is that most 
books, whether fiction, popular science, political biography, even graphics 
novels, focus on communicating the writer’s message to readers. This means 
that they show different ways of doing so.
Many business and management books, on the other hand, have as their 
sole purpose inducting readers into impenetrable and unnecessary jargon. If, 
however, your immediate purpose of improving your writing precludes for￾ays into leisure reading, here are some useful books. I wanted to give my list 
of recommendations such headings as “Things I Like,” but the excellent 
Benjamin Dreyer beat me to it. So I’ve organized them using slightly less 
personal headings: reference works, including style guides; language in the 
workplace; grammar and usage; history of the language; and writers on 
writing.
I’ll start, though, with Orwell’s six rules from “Politics and the English 
Language”:
• “Never use a metaphor, simile or other figure of speech which you are 
used to seeing in print.
• “Never use a long word where a short one will do.
• “If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.
• “Never use the passive where you can use the active.
• “Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word or a jargon word if you 
can think of an everyday English equivalent.
• “Break any of these rules sooner than say anything outright barbarous.”
You’ll see he gives you a get-out clause in the last one – especially useful 
when you need to use the passive. If you need more advice, though, keep 
reading.224 Resources
You may be surprised not to see some famous titles, organizations, or 
other language- and writing-related resources here.
This is not an oversight.
What you’ll see below is what I’ve found most reliable and often laugh￾out-loud funny. After all, if you don’t enjoy dipping into a book or visiting 
a website, what’s the use? Some of the items below will be familiar to you 
from previous chapters, while others will be waiting for you to discover 
them. In each category, I’ve included one or two “top picks” to start you off. 
Enjoy!
DICTIONARIES
• Cambridge Dictionary, https://dictionary.cambridge.org/
• The Chambers Dictionary, https://chambers.co.uk/book/the-chambers￾dictionary/
• Collins’ Dictionary, www.collinsdictionary.com/
• Dictionary by Merriam-Webster, www.merriam-webster.com/ (top 
pick)
• The Oxford English Dictionary, en.oxforddictionaries.com/
• Random House Learner’s Dictionary of American English, www.
wordreference.com/definition/
GRAMMAR AND USAGE, INCLUDING STYLE 
GUIDES (ALSO CALLED USAGE DICTIONARIES)
“I consider [a usage dictionary] kind of like a linguistic hard drive. To 
be honest, for me the big trio is a big dictionary, a usage dictionary, a 
thesaurus – only because I cannot retain and move nimbly around in 
enough of the language not to need these extra sources.”
– David Foster Wallace2
• Articulate Marketing. The Essential Business Grammar Guide. www.
articulatemarketing.com/the-essential-business-grammar-guide
• Brians, Paul. Common Errors in English Usage. Wilsonville, Oregon: 
Williams, James & Co., 2007. www.wsu.edu/~brians/errors/errors.
html
• Bryson, Bill. Troublesome Words. London: Penguin, 2002.
• Capital Community College’s Guide to Grammar and Writing. gram￾mar.ccc.comnet.edu/grammar
• Cutts, Martin. The Oxford Guide to Plain English. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2020. (top pick)Resources 225
• Dreyer, Benjamin. Dreyer’s English: An Utterly Correct Guide to 
Clarity and Style. London: Arrow Books, 2020.
• European Commission. “Claire’s Clear Writing Tips.” (particularly 
useful for non-native English-speakers writing in English) https://
ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/clear_writing_tips_en.pdf
• European Commission. “How to write clearly.” https://op.europa.eu/en/ 
publication-detail/-/publication/bb87884e-4cb6-4985-b796- 
70784ee181ce/language-en
• European Commission. Style Guide. https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/
default/files/styleguide_english_dgt_en.pdf
• Garner, Bryan A. The Chicago Guide to Grammar, Usage, and 
Punctuation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2016.
• Garner, Bryan A. Garner’s Modern English Usage. 4th edition. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2016. (top pick)
• Fogarty, Mignon. The Grammar Devotional: Daily Tips for Successful 
Writing from Grammar GirlTM. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2009.
• Fogarty, Mignon. Grammar Girl’s Quick and Dirty Tips for Better 
Writing. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin, 2008. www.quickanddirtyt￾ips.com/grammar-girl
• Fowler, H. W. A Dictionary of Modern English Usage. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2002.
• Gowers, Sir Ernest. The Complete Plain Words. London: Penguin, 
1984.
• Grammarist www.grammarist.com/
• Grammarphobia www.grammarphobia.com/
• Kamm, Oliver. Accidence Will Happen: A Non-Pedantic Guide to 
English Usage. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2015.
• Lynch, Jack, The English Language: A User’s Guide. Newburyport, 
Massachusetts: Focus Publishing/R. Pullins Co., 2008 andromeda.rut￾gers.edu/~jlynch/Writing/
• Partridge, Eric. Usage and Abusage: A Guide to Good English. 
London: Penguin, 1963.
• Pinker, Steven. The Sense of Style: The Thinking Person’s Guide to 
Writing in the 21st Century. New York: Penguin Books, 2014.
• Safire, William. How Not to Write: The Essential Misrules of 
Grammar. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2005.
• SEC Plain Language Handbook (1998): www.sec.gov/pdf/handbook.
pdf
• Shertzer, Margaret. The Elements of Grammar. New York: Macmillan, 
1986.
• Shrives, Craig, Grammar Rules: Writing with Military Precision. 
London: Kyle Books, 2011. www.grammar-monster.com
• Williams, Joseph M. Style: Ten Lessons in Clarity & Grace. 4th ed. 
New York: HarperCollins, 1994.226 Resources
LANGUAGE IN THE WORKPLACE
• Collins, Philip. To Be Clear: A Style Guide for Business Writing. 
London: Quercus, 2021. (top pick)
• Fugere, Brian, Chelsea Hardaway, and Jon Warshawsky. Why 
Business People Speak Like Idiots: A Bullfighter’s Guide. New York: 
Free Press, 2005.
• Garner, Bryan A. Legal Writing in Plain English: A Text with Exercises. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
• Garner, Bryan A. “LawProse” blog www.lawprose.org/category/
bryanagarner/
• Morris, Rupert. The Right Way to Write: How to Write Effective 
Business Letters, Reports, Memos and E-mail. London: Piatkus, 1999.
• Murphy, Elizabeth M. and Shelagh Snell. Effective Writing: Plain 
English at Work. London: Pitman Publishing, 1992.
• Phillips, Tim. Talk Normal: Stop the Business Speak, Jargon and 
Waffle. London: Kogan Page, 2011.
• Poole, Steven. Who Touched Base in My Thought Shower? London: 
Sceptre, 2013. (top pick)
• Seely, John. The Oxford Guide to Effective Writing and Speaking. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
• Simmons, John. We, Me, Them & It: How to Write Powerfully for 
Business. London: Cyan Communications Limited, 2006.
• UK Government Finance Function, Good Practice Guide: Risk 
Reporting (The Orange Book) (2021): https://assets.publishing.ser￾vice.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/1010814/Good_Practice_Guide_Risk_Reporting_Final.pdf www.
theiia.org/en/resources/knowledge-centers/artificial-intelligence/
• Van Emden, Joan and Jennifer Easteal. Report Writing. Maidenhead, 
UK: McGraw-Hill, 1987.
• Watson, Don. Death Sentence: The Decay of Public Language. London: 
Penguin, 2004.
• Watson, Don. Dictionary of Weasel Words, Contemporary Cliches, 
Cant and Management Jargon. London: Vintage, 2015.
HISTORY OF THE LANGUAGE, AND LINGUISTICS
• Crystal, David. The Stories of English. London: Penguin, 2004.
• Hitchings, Henry. The Language Wars: A History of Proper English. 
London: John Murray, 2011. (top pick)
• Greene, Lane. Talk on the Wild Side: The Untameable Nature of 
Language. Published under exclusive license from The Economist. 
London: Profile Books Ltd., 2018.Resources 227
• Lynch, Jack. The Lexicographer’s Dilemma: The Evolution of 
“Proper” English, from Shakespeare to South Park. New York: Walker 
Publishing Company, Inc., 2009.
• Pullum, Geoffrey K. Lingua Franca blog posts www.lel.ed.ac.uk/~g￾pullum/linguafrancaposts.html
• Murphy, Lynne. “Separated by a Common Language” blog https://
separatedbyacommonlanguage.blogspot.com/
WRITERS ON WRITING
• Garner, Bryan A. Quack This Way: David Foster Wallace & Bryan 
A. Garner Talk Language and Writing. Dallas: RosePen Books, 2013.
• Kilpatrick, James J. Fine Print: Reflections on the Writing Art. Kansas 
City, Missouri; Andrews & McMeel, 1994.
• King, Stephen. On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft. London: Hodder 
& Stoughton, 2000. (top pick)
• Moran, Joe. First You Write a Sentence: The Elements of Reading, 
Writing…and Life. London: Penguin Random House, 2018.
• Zinsser, William. On Writing Well. 25th-anniversary ed. New York: 
HarperCollins, 2001. (top pick)
NOTES
1 On Writing: A Memoir of the Craft (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 2000), 167.
2 Garner, Quack This Way, 69.229
ABCs, 65, 68, 78–79, 82, 91–92, 
94–96, 121, 187, 220
AbilityNet, 154
Academic writing, 13
Accents, 76, 82–83, 85; see also
Dialects
Accessible/accessibility, xxiii, 56, 
124, 128, 132–133, 152, 154, 193, 
220; see also Anti-discrimination 
legislation, Assistive technology, 
Inclusive language, Plain language
Accountancy, 14, 27, 49, 57, 81, 113, 
173
Acronym, 31, 68, 98, 150, 173, 176, 
184, 190
Action plans, 139, 145, 152, 154, 161, 
187, 198
Active voice, 47, 56, 68–71, 73–74, 
78, 80, 96, 128, 162, 208; see also
Passive voice
Adequate, 16, 73, 189
Agile, 84–85, 117, 149, 219
Agius, Marcus, 50
aide-mémoire, 113, 170, 175, 211
Al-Khalili, Jim, 68
American Dyslexia Association, 123
American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants, 91
André, Pierre, xi 
Anti-discrimination legislation, 132; 
see also Accesible/accessibility, 
Assistive technology, Inclusive 
language, Plain language
Apostrophes, 88–89
Appendices, 46, 80, 111, 127–128, 
131, 138–139, 141, 146, 152, 154, 
164, 189, 191, 197
Articulate Marketing, 96, 224
Artificial intelligence (AI), 80–81, 
97, 121, 123, 176, 197; see also
ChatGPT, Large language models 
(LLMs)
Assistive technology, 101
Association of Chartered Certified 
Accountants, 130
Assurance, 12, 15, 44, 49, 66, 73, 80–81, 
107–109, 121, 129, 135, 145, 149, 
169, 186–188, 191–192, 196, 210
Audit (or audit and risk) committees, 
30, 132, 145, 190, 192
Austen, Jane, 89, 123
Automated reporting, 121, 124
Bank of England, 34, 38
Barclays, 14, 50
BBC, 8, 21, 48, 52, 60, 98
Beddington, Emma, 8
Behavior, 34, 44, 50, 53, 107, 128, 174, 
195, 219
Bello, Ola, xi, 29, 34, 175
Benchmarking, 105, 118, 141, 187
Berkshire Hathaway, 47, 60
Bettany, Jane, xi, 13, 29, 34, 54, 183, 
196, 210
Bierce, Ambrose, 91
Bihari, Endre, 208
Boards, 17–19, 27, 31–34, 38, 44, 
54–55, 57, 59, 75, 79, 100, 104–106, 
108–109, 115–116, 125, 129, 131, 
133, 146, 151, 154, 159, 164, 166, 
184–185, 187, 189–192, 196, 199
BP, 46–47, 60, 79, 97, 219
Breach, Paul, xi, 117, 187, 210
Brians, Paul, 224
Briefings, 60, 72, 104, 110, 115, 120, 
125
Index230 Index
Brown, Jeffrey W., xi, 131, 165, 172, 
184
Browne, Rachel, xi, 56, 135, 193, 207
Bryson, Bill, 224
Buffett, Warren E., 47
Bullet points, 72–73, 114, 120, 122, 
134
Bullshit, 22, 38, 60–61, 98
Bureaucracy, 12, 13
Business writing, 13, 96, 226
Buzzwords, 19, 31, 49, 53, 83
Capital Community College Guide to 
Grammar and Writing, 98, 110, 123
Carawan, Mark, xi, 14–15, 50, 109, 
185, 187–188, 194
Carr, Nicholas, 115
Center for Plain English Accounting, 91
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 55, 
151
CEO, 33–34, 48, 53, 55, 58, 81, 129, 
149, 183, 189, 192
Chalabyan, Ara, xi, 127, 134
Chambers, Richard, xi, xiii, 70, 96, 
159, 180, 200
Champlain University, 199
Change (UK charity), 154
Chardot, Vincent, xi, 129
Chartered Accountants Ireland, 91, 99
Chartered Institute of Editing and 
Proofreading, 216
Chartered Institute of Internal Auditors, 
xiii, 30, 96, 130, 154, 181
ChatGPT, 80–82, 94, 97, 176, 181; 
see also Large language models 
(LLMs)
Checklists, ix, 58, 79, 201, 208, 211, 
213
Chesshire, John, xi, 12, 25, 29, 33, 93, 
132, 192
Chicago Manual of Style, 201, 216
Chief Audit Executive (CAE), 44–45, 
65, 91, 127, 169, 185, 195
Chief Information Security Officer 
(CISO), 31–32, 37, 131, 161, 184, 
186
Chilcot Inquiry, 173
Christianson, Melissa, 45, 60
Clarity, 19, 39, 41, 43, 45, 47–49, 
51–53, 55–61, 65, 67–71, 73, 75, 77, 
79, 81–83, 85, 87, 89, 91, 93, 95–97, 
99, 125, 127, 129, 183, 196, 209, 
221, 225
Clarity Index, 47, 70
Clarity Writing Experts, 60
Cliché, 42, 57, 93
COBIT, 37, 169
Collins, Philip, 96–97, 226
Committees, 18, 27, 30, 37–38, 44, 46, 
54–56, 60, 106, 132–133, 145–146, 
152–153, 161, 164, 184–187, 189–193
Communication, xiii, xvii–xxii, 3, 5–17, 
19–21, 23–25, 27–31, 33–37, 39, 42, 
45, 47–49, 53, 55–56, 58, 65, 72, 
81, 83, 90–93, 95, 98, 102, 105–107, 
109, 116–117, 129, 131, 133–135, 
137, 149, 151, 154, 160, 162–163, 
165, 172, 175–176, 179, 186, 193, 
198, 210, 218, 220–221, 226
Compliance, xiii, xvi, xix–xx, xxiii, 
12, 14–15, 17, 32, 35–36, 40, 44, 
70, 72–73, 106, 108–109, 121, 125, 
130–131, 150–151, 159, 163, 
166–169, 173–174, 181, 184, 186, 
188, 195, 218
Conference of State Bank Supervisors, 
196
Conflict, 18–19, 26–27, 44, 49, 70, 
133, 145, 162–163, 175, 188, 191, 
198
Control/s, xxii, 11, 14, 16, 18, 32–33, 
36, 40, 49, 55, 60, 71–73, 100, 105, 
107–108, 120, 122, 130, 139, 145, 
149, 161–162, 167–168, 171, 174, 
176, 178, 180–181, 184, 186, 189, 
193
Cooke, Ian, 181, 198
Corporatespeak, 44, 53, 61, 83–85, 92, 
95, 219–220
COSO, 169
Creativity, 130, 137, 174
Cresci, Elena, 98
Critical (or analytical) thinking, xviii, 
59, 65, 80–81, 95–96, 125
Crystal, David, 97, 226
Culture (cultural), xiii, xv, xxii, 
xvii–xviii, xx, xxiii, 3, 5–15, 17, 
19–23, 25–29, 31–33, 34, 36–37, 
39–41, 44, 48–52, 59, 65, 68, 
70, 75–76, 82, 92, 94, 101, 114, 
128–129, 159–160, 165, 171–172, 
174, 178, 183, 188–189, 194–195, 
218–222
Custis, Tyler, 45, 60
Cutts, Martin, xi, 74, 76, 78, 84, 89, 
133, 207, 209, 224Index 231
Cybersecurity, 15–16, 21, 31, 37, 40, 
52, 70, 92, 103–104, 108, 117, 122, 
130–131, 159, 172, 175, 184, 196; 
see also Information security
Dart, David, xi, 83
Data protection, 130, 167
Deadlines, xvii–xviii, 19, 39, 74, 
100–103, 113, 116–117, 168, 200, 
205–207, 210, 212
Deegan, David, xi, 218
Deepwater Horizon, 46, 60, 79, 97, 
219
Defensiveness, 25, 114, 194
Deloitte, 35, 38, 128
Dialects, 82, 85
Dictionaries, xx, xxiii, 65, 86–87, 90, 
97, 224–226; Cambridge English, 
87, 224; Chambers Dictionary, 
224; Collins’ Dictionary, 224; 
Merriam-Webster, 87, 224; Oxford 
Dictionaries, xxiii, 65, 87, 97, 224; 
Random House Learner’s Dictionary 
of American English, 87, 224
Dodd, Clare, 96
Douglas, Yellowlees, 96, 98
Dreyer, Benjamin, 89, 96, 98, 201, 208, 
223, 225
Dyslexia, 25, 85, 101, 115, 123, 
132–133, 203, 206
Dyslexia UK, 123
Easteal, Jennifer, 226
Edinburgh University Information 
Services, 133, 154
Editing/editorial, xi, 70, 78, 86, 88, 91, 
94, 98, 201–202, 208, 216–217
Effective, xvii, xxii–xxiii, 16, 27, 29, 
33–34, 37, 40–41, 43, 68, 80, 91, 
102, 108, 128, 146, 151, 159, 170, 
181, 185, 189, 198, 205, 210–211, 
226
Ego, 42, 52–53, 59, 163, 208, 
220
Ehrenreich, Barbara, 75, 96, 219
Email, xix, 8, 10, 13, 19, 25, 36, 42, 
48, 50, 58, 82, 88, 100, 102, 110, 
115–118, 120–124, 131, 147–148, 
153, 185, 198, 204, 207, 214, 216, 
220
Emotion, xvii, xxi, xxiii, 5, 13, 81–83, 
101, 134, 166, 182, 194, 208, 211, 
221
Enron, 51–52, 60
Ethics, 14, 19, 55, 58–59, 91–92, 188, 
195, 220
Eulerich, Marc, 176, 181
Euphemisms, 19, 50
European Banking Authority (EBA), 
35, 38
European Central Bank (ECB), 35, 38
European Commission, 225
European Cyber Security Organisation 
(ECSO), 31–32, 37
Eurozone, 49
Executive summaries, 17–18, 46, 60, 
111, 126–127, 130, 132, 136–138, 
145–146, 152–154, 159, 164, 176, 
182–195, 197–199, 205, 211, 221
External audit, 14, 50, 108, 128
Fadiman, Anne, 99
Federal Reserve, 35, 38
Fieldwork, 71, 113–114, 150, 160, 
162, 170, 173, 180, 187–188, 197, 
211
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), 51
Financial Reporting Council (FRC), 
130
Financial services, 17, 34–35, 50–51, 
128, 163, 214
Financial Services Authority (FSA), 51
Findings, 4, 18, 40, 45, 49, 60, 70, 84, 
86, 106, 114, 127–129, 131, 136, 
138–139, 147–148, 150, 152–154, 
159–165, 167, 169–179, 181, 183, 
186–189, 191–192, 195, 197–198, 
205, 211, 221; see also Issues, 
Observations
Five Cs, 160, 177, 221
Five Pillars, 31
Fogarty, Mignon, 97, 225
Format/formatting, 83, 132, 137, 
147–152, 154, 193, 207, 212–213, 
216
Fowler, H. W., 225
Fox, Kate, 7, 10, 21
Frankensentence, 203
Fraud, 8, 18–19, 45, 50, 52, 73, 105, 
111–112, 145, 188, 214
FTSE 100, 47
Fugelsang, Jonathan A., 98
Fugere, Brian, 163, 226
Garbage language, 61, 83, 97
Garner, Bryan A., 41, 59, 78, 225–227232 Index
Gendered language, 90–91, 99; see also
Anti-discrimination legislation, 
Inclusive language
General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR), 107, 167
Global financial crisis, 12, 34–35, 48, 
51, 55
Global Internal Audit Standards, xxvii, 
44, 70, 91, 131
Governance, xiii, 12, 25, 31, 56, 72, 
88, 93, 108, 112, 120–121, 128, 130, 
154, 161, 164, 172, 180, 183, 196, 
199, 214–215
Gowers, Sir Ernest, 225
Grammar, xxi–xxii, 28, 76–77, 80, 83, 
87–90, 95–99, 101, 110, 121, 123, 
201–203, 206–207, 209, 213, 215, 
223–225
Grammarly, 78, 91
Grant, Adam, 59, 67
Greene, Lane, 98, 226
Groupthink, 26, 30, 44, 48
Haber, Jonathan, 59
Hagen, Shawn Von, xi, 169
Hardaway, Chelsea, 163, 226
Harvard Business Review, 37
HBOS, 48, 52, 60
Headings, 111, 116, 125, 146, 182, 
192, 223
Heffernan, Margaret, 26, 37, 43–44, 49
Hemingway, Ernest, 120
Hierarchy/hierarchical, 11–12, 19, 50, 
59, 84, 110, 115
Hill, David, xi 
Hitchings, Henry, 226
Hofstede, Geert, 6
Holzman, Joseph, 96
Hooge, Rinus de, xi, 8, 27, 160, 195, 210
Hopkin, Paul, 181
House of Commons, 51, 56, 60
Identity, 13, 41, 52
Impact, 42, 45, 59, 94, 107, 109, 145, 
149, 166–167, 196, 219
Inadequate, 16, 139, 171
Inclusive language, 58, 90, 99; see also
Accessible/accessibility, Anti￾discrimination legislation, Assistive 
technology, Gendered language, Plain 
language
Ineffective, xv, xxi, 14, 16, 79, 139, 
206, 208, 218, 220
Information security, xiii, 31, 37, 
130, 151, 176, 190; see also
Cybersecurity
Information Systems Audit and Control 
Association (ISACA), 130, 37, 130, 
155, 181, 198
Institute of Internal Auditors, xiii, xvii, 
30, 44, 91, 96, 98–99, 130–131, 150, 
154, 160, 165, 181, 200
Institute of Risk Management, 130, 
165, 167, 181
Interactive reporting, 134, 147
Internal audit, xiii, 8, 10–16, 18, 
28–29, 44, 49, 70, 80, 83, 91, 96, 99, 
106, 108–109, 113, 117, 121, 127, 
129, 131–132, 134, 145, 148–149, 
160, 165, 174–177, 180–182, 186, 
198
International Compliance Association, 
130
International Dyslexia Foundation, 123
Intranet, 41, 58
Iraq War, 173
International Standards Organization 
(ISO), 105, 166, 180; ISO27001, 
130; ISO 31000–2009, 166
Issues, 28, 40–41, 45, 49–50, 52, 55, 
60, 65, 92, 114, 116–117, 131–132, 
137, 145, 148–149, 154–155, 159, 
174, 177, 181, 189, 213–215; 
see also Findings, Observations
Jacka, Mike, 150, 155
James, Sara I. (James Ratio), xiii, 96, 
101–102, 113, 121–122, 154, 198, 
220
Janus-word, 86
Jargon, 14, 49, 56, 83–84, 93, 97, 165, 
173, 176, 184, 223, 226
Jefferson, Thomas, 73
Kamm, Oliver, 225
Kara-Yakoubiam, Mane, 98
Karazanashvili, Nino, xi, 11, 175
Key performance indicators (KPIs), 
12–13
Kilpatrick, James J., 227
King, Stephen, 223, 227
Kratzer, Philipp, xi, 190
Language, xi, xiii, xviii, xxi, xxiii, 
6–9, 13, 15, 18–19, 21, 31–33, 
35, 39–41, 43–44, 46–52, 54–59, Index 233
61, 67–68, 74, 76, 78, 80–85, 87, 
89–99, 121, 125, 128, 130, 132–133, 
135, 137, 159, 163, 166, 176, 187, 
196–197, 202–203, 208, 218–221, 
223–227
Lapakko, David, 21
Large language models (LLMs), 80–82, 
94–95, 120–123, 176, 197; see also
Artificial Intelligence (AI), ChatGPT
Lasky-Fink, Jessica, 42, 59
Latinism, 14
Lawati, Abbas Al, 123
Layout, viii, 124–125, 127, 129, 
131–135, 137, 139, 141, 143, 145, 
147, 149–153, 155, 202, 214–215, 
220
Leonard, Elmore, 198
Lewis, Michael, 48
Lincoln, Abraham, xviii, 100, 122
Lingard, Lorelei, 81–82
Lipinski, Egemen, 181
London Interbank Overnight Rate 
(LIBOR), 50, 60, 214–216
London Stock Exchange Group, 117, 
187
Lynch, Jack, 90, 225, 227
Makortoff, Kalyeena, 38
Malik, Nesrine, 76
Management information (MI), 89, 
139, 168, 172, 207
Marks, Norman, 159, 180
Marschke, Alee, xi, 80, 176, 196
Mary, Norris, 216
Materiality, 27, 34, 139, 174
McCaig, Margaret, xi, 174–175, 
184
McKay, Louise, xi, 73, 80, 84, 109, 
165, 200
McWhorter, John, 98
Mechanics, xi, 202–204, 207, 211–214, 
216
Meegan, Fran, xi, 196, 204
Melliou, Marisa, xi, 70, 132, 135, 162, 
169
Memo(randum), xix, 40, 49, 75, 115, 
120, 125, 182, 226
Meyer, Erin, 10, 22
Microsoft Word, 77, 91, 110; see also
Readability statistics
Mind maps/mind mapping, 103–112, 
115, 118, 120, 122, 170, 172, 194, 
220
Mitford, Nancy, 98
Mohawk College, 154
Moon, A. R., 97
Moran, Joe, 227
Morris, Rupert, xi, 47, 70, 74, 226
Morrison, Lennox, 21
Murphy, Elizabeth M., 226
Murphy, Lynne, 227
Myths, xxi, 12, 21, 75, 89, 98, 207
National Audit Office (NAO), 192
National defense, 192
National Health Service, 12
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), 37, 169
Nelson, Irvin T., 65
Newspeak, 84
Nguyen, Duyen, xi, 145–146, 148
Nokia, 48
Nominalization, 78, 96–97; see also
Zombies
Non-compliance, 163, 168, 188
Nouns, 78–80, 85, 90, 94–97, 213
O’Brien, Hettie, 22
Observations, 29, 70, 112, 127, 136, 
138–139, 150, 152, 159–161, 163, 
165, 167, 169, 171–173, 175, 
177–179, 181, 187, 195, 221; 
see also Findings, Issues
One-page/mini report, 115, 117, 131, 
183, 185
Opinion, 12, 29, 91, 128, 145, 182, 
186–187, 195, 213
Oppenheimer, Daniel M., 60, 74
Orwell, George, xxiii, 39, 69, 84, 123; 
see also “Politics and the English 
Language”
Outlines, 10, 110–120, 122–123, 
152, 170, 175, 182, 194, 197, 211, 
220
Pandemic, xxi, 6, 29, 35, 117, 131
Partridge, Eric, 225
Passive voice, 68–71, 73–74, 76, 79–80, 
94–95, 162, 178, 213, 220; see also
Active voice
Phillips, Tim, 226
Pinker, Steven, 225
Plain language, 31, 33, 44, 47–48, 
54–56, 67–68, 80–81, 83, 90, 92–97, 
125, 128, 130, 133, 135, 159, 
176, 187, 196–197, 203, 208, 218, 234 Index
220–221, 225; see also Accessible/
accessibility, Anti-discrimination 
legislation, Assistive technology, 
Inclusive language
Plain Language Association 
International, 92, 133
Plan/ning, xix, xxii, 10, 48, 57, 75, 87, 
100–109, 111–113, 115, 117–124, 
128–129, 135, 139, 145, 152, 154, 
159, 161, 173, 187, 190, 192–194, 
198, 203–204, 209–210, 218, 
220
Plotnik, Arthur, 216
Politics, xx, xxiii, 39, 49, 59–61, 84, 
96, 194, 208, 212, 221, 223
“Politics and the English Language,” 
xxiii, 39, 223; see also Orwell, 
George
Poole, Steven, 84, 226
Power, Benjamin, 181
PowerPoint, 134–135
Pressfield, Steven, xvii, xxiii, 204
Prien, Nicolo, 176, 181
PRINCE 2, 84, 166
Processes/procedures, xi, xv, xvii, xx, 
xxii, 11, 15–16, 18, 26, 30, 32, 36, 
40–42, 49, 51, 67, 72–73, 75, 79–81, 
84, 86, 89–90, 95, 102, 
108–109, 114–115, 120–121, 128, 
137, 139, 141, 145, 149–151, 
161–163, 170, 173–174, 176–179, 
181, 184, 186, 190–191, 197–198, 
200–202, 204–212, 216
Proofread/ing, 76, 201–202, 
211–212, 216–217
Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA), 
51
Psarras, Alex, xi, 121
Pullum, Geoffrey K., 227
Punctuation, xxi–xxii, 28, 83, 
87–89, 96, 98, 201–202, 213, 216, 
225
PwC, 199
Quality assurance (QA), 151, 192, 196, 
210
Quiller-Crouch, Arthur, 96
Ragothaman, Srinvisavan, 45, 60
Ratings, 138, 145, 160, 186, 191, 198, 
212
Reading aloud, 88, 101, 121, 203
Readability statistics, 77–78, 91, 95, 
101, 121
Recommendations, xvii, 12, 60, 72, 
111, 127, 137, 146, 148, 152–154, 
159, 161, 163, 165, 167, 169, 
171–175, 177–179, 181, 187, 191, 
193–194, 197–198, 223
Regulation/regulatory, xvii, 15, 19, 
28, 30, 35–36, 56, 107–108, 125, 
127–129, 139, 141, 147, 166–168, 
174, 178–179, 196–197, 219
Reinalda, Rob, 86, 98
Remote working, 29, 36, 205, 209
Reputation, 30, 45, 82, 107, 139, 
166–167, 176, 178, 219
Reviewers, xxi, 42, 79, 86–87, 103, 
120, 122, 200–210, 212, 216
Ripmeester, Nannette, xi, 7
Risk, xi, xiii, xvi–xvii, xix–xxiii, 5, 8, 
11–12, 14–21, 26–27, 29–32, 35–37, 
40–41, 43–45, 48, 51–52, 54–55, 
57, 60, 66, 70, 72–73, 75, 91, 93, 
104–109, 112–114, 120–121, 125, 
127, 129–132, 138–139, 145, 
148–151, 159–160, 162, 165–176, 
178–181, 184, 186, 188–193, 
195–199, 207, 211–212, 214–215, 
218–221, 226; Risk appetite, 20, 27, 
32, 108, 166; Risk assessment, 26, 
105, 107, 138; Risk-based internal 
audit, 109
Rogers, Todd, 42, 59
Rollins, Henry, 101, 103
Root cause, 45, 67, 113, 120, 139, 145, 
148, 160, 169–172, 174, 178, 197, 221
Ross, Alan, 84
Rühle, Alexander, xi, 81, 121
Rusate, Alex, 123
Russell, Trent, 149
Safire, William, 225
Sanders, Steven, xi, 196, 221
Sandwith, Liz, xi, 149, 154
Sarbanes-Oxley, 109
Sawyer’s Internal Auditing, 84, 98, 125, 
182, 211, 217, 222
Sawyer, Lawrence B., 98
Scope, 30, 80, 85, 131, 138, 141, 145, 
152, 189, 198
Scott, Petersen, xi, 145–146, 148
Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 56, 109, 225Index 235
Seely, John, 226
Shariatmadari, David, 21, 89, 98
Sharman, Jon, 98
Shoemaker, Dan, xi, 174, 183
Shrives, Craig, 225
Simmons, John, 226
Singleton, Tommie, 155
Six dimensions model, 6
Slang, 82
Smith, Emma, xi, 9, 102, 105, 163, 
167, 176, 184
Smith, Zadie, 204
Snell, Shelagh, 226
Software, xxiii, 77–78, 80–81, 94, 103, 
120, 150, 153, 219
Spelling- and grammar-checker, 88, 
206, 213
Spicer, André, 13, 22, 34, 45, 48, 52–55
Split infinitives, 89, 207; see also Myths
Standards, xx, xxiii, 11, 14, 20–21, 
24, 26, 31, 35, 37, 39, 41, 44, 51, 
58, 60, 70, 83, 87–91, 100, 105, 
107–108, 110, 118, 121, 124, 127, 
130–132, 135, 137, 145, 150–151, 
161–162, 180, 188–190, 201, 
209–210, 212
Steinhoff, Gordon, 65
Stepanyan, Komitas, xi, 91, 130, 134, 
151, 174, 189, 191
Stibbe, Matthew, 96
Stokel-Walker, Chris, 98
Stolz, Jennifer A., 98
Structure, 9, 46, 50, 58, 68, 71, 113, 
121, 124–131, 133, 135, 137, 139, 
141, 143, 145, 147, 149–153, 155, 
159, 163, 194, 200–203, 218, 220
Styles (style guides), xxi, 28, 42, 49, 
87, 91, 94, 96, 135, 201–202, 217, 
223–226
Taber, Jon, 123
Templates, xi, xxiii, 58, 91, 95, 100–101, 
117, 121, 124, 127, 129–130, 135–144, 
146–147, 150–154, 169–170, 186
Tense, 69
Terminology, 14, 31–33, 37, 44, 57, 
84–85, 159, 196
Terms of reference, xix, 107, 118, 120, 
122, 127, 138, 141, 164, 172, 189
Testing, 31, 34–35, 107–108, 113, 120, 
122, 128, 145–146, 148, 173–174, 
195
The Guardian, 21–22, 38, 96, 98–99, 
198, 217
The New Yorker, 201, 216
The Orange Book, 226
The Sun, 187
Thesaurus, 86, 224
Three Qs, 160–161, 174–177
Tone at the top, 17, 21, 33, 44, 48–49, 
58
Toulmin, Stephen E., 59
Turpin, Martin Harry, 98
Typos, 55, 102, 201, 203, 207, 209, 
212, 214, 216
Tytkovskyi, Oleksandr, 174
U-speak, 84
UK Consumer Rights Act 2015, 56
UK Corporate Governance Code, 130
UK Department for Business, Energy 
and Industrial Strategy, 128
UK Parliament, 50–51
University of Washington, 133, 154
US Federal Reserve, 35
US Government Accountability Office 
(GAO), 193
Usage, xxi–xxii, 57, 83, 86–87, 
89–90, 92, 96, 201–202, 216, 
223–225
Valukas, Anton R., 49
Van Emden, Joan, 226
Variale, Michele, 149, 154
Verbs, 56, 78, 85, 95, 97–98, 203
Verbiage, 25, 42, 51–54, 75, 207; 
see also Waffle
Videos/videoconferences, 4–5, 30, 124, 
129, 131, 135, 148–149, 153–154, 
205, 210
Vocabulary, xxi, 16, 26, 57, 76, 80, 85, 
87, 90, 94, 97, 216, 219
Waffle, 51, 132, 201, 226; 
see also Verbiage
Walker, Alexander C., 98
Walker, Heather E. K., 98
Wallace, David Foster, 41, 59, 85, 113, 
227
Warshawsky, Jon, 163, 226
Watson, Cecelia, 89, 98
Watson, Don, 84, 226
Weldon, Fay, 115
Whitehead, Colson, 74, 96, 203, 217236 Index
Williams, Joseph M., 225
Wood, David A., 176, 181
Word counts, 75–76, 79
Word-blind/ness, 77, 97, 202–203, 208
Wordsmithing, 35, 87, 201, 204, 
206–207, 212
World Economic Forum (WEF), 196
Young, Molly, 54, 58, 83
Zack, Malcolm, xi, 145–146, 148
Zadelhoff, Marc van, 37
Zinsser, William, xviii, xxiii, 227
Zombies, 71, 78–80, 94–95, 
213
